
Practical 1(B)

(B) Aim: Assign roles and permissions to Active Directory users to perform functions in
vCenter Server Appliance.
Objective : In this lab, you perform the following tasks:
1. Join the vCenter Server Appliance to vclass.local Domain
2. Add vclass.local as an Identity Source
3. View Active Directory Users
4. Assign Object Permissions to an Active Directory User
5. Assign Root-Level Global Permission
6. Log In with Windows Session Authentication
7. Use an Active Directory User to Manage a Virtual Machine
In this lab, you use vSphere Web Client to perform the tasks
Steps:
Task 1: Join the vCenter Server Appliance to vclass.local Domain
You can configure a Platform Services Controller appliance or a vCenter Server Appliance with an
embedded Platform Services Controller to join or leave an Active Directory domain. Verify that the
user name you use to log in to the vCenter Server instance in the vCenter Server Appliance is a
member of the System Configuration. Administrators group in vCenter Single Sign-On.
In this lab you join VCSA to the vclass.local domain as an Active Directory (Integrated Windows
Authentication) Identity Source. This allows an active directory user to be selected and assigned rights
to manage a virtual machine.
1. Open your Firefox web browser, click vSphere Site-A on the favorite bar, and select vSphere
Web Client (SA-VCSA-01).
2. Log in with the user name administrator@vsphere.local and the password VMware1!.
3. In vSphere Web Client, click the Home icon and select Administration.
4. In the Administration pane, navigate to Deployment and select System Configuration.
5. Under System Configuration, select Nodes.
6. Under Nodes, select sa-vcsa-01.vclass.local, and click the Manage tab.
7. Under Advanced, select Active Directory, and click Join.

8. In the sa-vcsa-01.vclass.local Join Active Directory wizard, enter the following
information. Domain vclass.local

Organizational Unit Leave blank
User name administrator@vclass.local
Password VMware1!

9. Click OK.
You will not receive an acknowledgment message after clicking OK. Move to the next step.
10. Reboot the VCSA.
a. From the sa-vcsa-01.vclass.local Actions menu, and select Reboot.
b. In the sa-vcsa-01.vclass.local - Reboot dialog box, enter Joining sa-vcsa-01.vclass.local
to the vclass.local domain., and click OK.
The reboot takes 10 to 15 minutes.
11. Close vSphere Web Client.
Task 2: Add vclass.local as an Identity Source
1. Open the Firefox web browser, click vSphere Site-A on the favorite bar, and select vSphere Web
Client (SA-VCSA-01).
2. Log in with the user name administrator@vsphere.local and the password VMware1!.
3. In vSphere Web Client, click the Home icon, and select Administration.
4. In the Administration pane, navigate to Single Sign-on and select Configuration.
5. In the SSO Configuration for sa-vcsa-01.vclass.local pane, click the Identity Sources tab.
6. On the Identity Sources tab, click the Add Identity Source icon (the green plus
sign). The Add identity source wizard opens.
7. On the Select Identity Source Type page, verify that Active Directory (Integrated Windows
Authentication) is selected.
8. Click Next.
9. On the Configure Identity Source Type page, verify that VCLASS.LOCAL is entered in the
Domain name field.
10. Click Next.
11. On the Ready to Complete page, review your entries and click Finish.
12. On the Identity Sources tab, validate that vclass.local has been added as an identity source.
Q1. What is the Type listed for the vclass.local identity source?
1. vclass.local is listed as Active Directory (Integrated Windows Authentication).

Task 3: View Active Directory Users
1. In the Navigator pane, under Single Sign-on click Users and Groups.
2. In the Users and Groups pane, the Users tab opens.
3. On the Users tab, select vclass.local from the Domain drop-down menu.
4. Locate the Administrator user name.
The Administrator account is used in the next task.
Task 4: Assign Object Permissions to an Active Directory User
Permission is assigned at a vCenter Server level and propagated to children objects. The assigned
permission applies to objects such as data centers, folders, clusters, hosts, virtual machines and other
vCenter Server level objects.
In vSphere Web Client, click the Home icon and select Hosts and Clusters.
1. Right click sa-vcsa-01.vclass.local and click Add Permission.
2. In the sa-vcsa-01.vclass.local - Add Permissions wizard, select Administrator and assign
a role.
a. Under Users and Groups, click Add.
b. On the Select Users/Groups page, select vclass.local from the Domain drop-down menu.
c. Under Users and Groups, click Administrator.
d. Click Add.
e. Verify that vclass.local\Administrator is listed in the Users text field.
f. Click Check names.
g. In Correct usernames, click OK.

h. In Select User/Groups, click OK.
i. Under Assigned Role, select Administrator from the Assigned Role drop-down menu.
j. In sa-vcsa-01.vclass.local - Add Permission, click OK.
Task 5: Assign Root-Level Global Permission
Object level permissions are not available for Content Libraries, the direct parent for content
libraries is the global root. To assign a permission on a content library, an Administrator must
grant the permission to the user as a global permission.
1. Click the Home icon and select Administration.
2. In the Navigator pane, navigate to Access Control and select Global Permissions.
3. In the Global Permissions pane, click Manage, and then click the Add permission icon (the
green plus sign)
4. In the Global Permissions Root - Add Permissions wizard, select Content library administrator
(sample) and assign a role.
a. Under Users and Groups, click Add.
b. On the Select Users/Groups page, select vclass.local from the Domain drop-down menu.
c. Under Users and Groups, click Administrator.
d. Click Add.
e. Verify that vclass.local\Administrator is listed in the Users text field.
f. Click Check names.
g. In Correct usernames, click OK.
h. In Select User/Groups, click OK.
i. Under Assigned Role, select Content library administrator (sample) from the Assigned
Role drop-down menu.
j. In sa-vcsa-01.vclass.local - Add Permission, click OK.
k. Verify that VCLASS.LOCAL\Administrator is included in the User/Group list as
Administrator.
5. Log out of vSphere Web Client.

Task 6: Log In with Windows Session Authentication
You now have the option to log in to vSphere Client or vSphere Web Client as
administrator@vclass.local or administrator@vsphere.local to complete the remaining labs.
1. On the vSphere Web Client (SA-VCSA-01) login screen, select the Use Windows
session authentication check box and click Login.
2. You are logged in to vSphere Web Client (SA-VCSA-01) as administrator@vclass.local.
Task 7: Use an Active Directory User to Manage a Virtual Machine
1. In vSphere Web Client, click the Home icon and select VMs and Templates.
2. In the Navigator pane, expand SA-Datacenter.
3. Right-click Photon-ForTemplate and select Template > Convert to Template.
4. Click Yes to verify converting the virtual machine to a template.
5. In the Navigator pane, drag the Photon-ForTemplate template into the Templates folder.
6. Expand the Templates folder.
7. Right-click Photon-ForTemplate and select New VM from This Template.
8. On the Select name and folder page, enter Photon-01 in the Virtual Machine Name text box.
9. Expand the view for sa-vcsa-01.vclass.local > SA-Datacenter, select the Lab VMs folder and
click Next.
10. On the Select a compute resource page, expand SA-Datacenter > Lab Servers.
11. Select the sa-esxi-01.vclass.local host and click Next.
12. On the Select storage page, select Class-Datastore.
13. From the Select virtual disk format drop-down menu, select Thin Provision and click Next.
14. On the Select Clone options page, accept the default settings and click Next.
15. On the Ready to complete page, review the information and click Finish.
16. In the Recent Tasks pane, monitor the progress of the template deployment task and wait for
completion.
17. In the navigator pane, select Photon-01.

18. In the right pane, click the Summary tab.
19. In the Navigation pane, right-click Photon-01, then click Delete from Disk.
20. Click Yes to verify the deletion.
21. Log out of vSphere Web Client and close the Firefox Web browser.
22. In the next lab, you use vSphere Client to perform the tasks.
23. Inform your instructor that you have completed this lab. If prompted, continue to the next lab.
