
Practical No: 2

(B) Aim: Configure access to an iSCSI datastore.
Objective: In this lab, you perform the following tasks:
1. Validate an Existing ESXi Host iSCSI Configuration
2. Add a VMkernel Port Group to a Standard Switch
3. Configure the iSCSI Software Adapter
4. Connect the iSCSI Software Adapters to Storage
In this lab, you use vSphere Client to perform the tasks.
Steps:
Task 1: Validate an Existing ESXi Host iSCSI Configuration
You use VMkernel interfaces to provide network connectivity for your hosts and to handle other types
of traffic, such as VMware vSphere® vMotion® traffic, storage traffic, and VMware vSphere® Fault
Tolerance traffic. In this task, you validate an existing VMkernel and iSCSI software adapter
configuration on your first host.
1. In vSphere Client, click the Menu icon and select Hosts and Clusters.
2. In the Navigator pane, select sa-esxi-01.vclass.local.
3. In the right pane, the Configure tab is open.
4. In the center pane, select Storage > Storage Adapters.
5. In the Storage Adapters pane, validate iSCSI Software Adapter.
a. Scroll and select the existing iSCSI software adapter.
Verify that Online is shown in the Status column.
6. In the Storage Adapters pane, open the Properties tab.
a. Record the storage adapter properties.

• Status
Under General
• Name
• SCSI Name
Under Authentication
• Method

7. Open the Devices tab and verify that MSFT iSCSI Disk devices are present.
8. Open the Dynamic Discovery tab.

• Record the iSCSI Server IP address

9. Open the Static Discovery tab.

• Record the second iSCSI Server IP address and port

10. Open the Network Port Binding tab.

a. In the Port Group column, click Management Network (vSwitch0).
b. Click View Details.
The Details for vmk0 page opens.
The information that you recorded in step 8 and step 9 can also be seen in the Details
for vmk0 page.
c. Click Close.
Task 2: Add a VMkernel Port Group to a Standard Switch
In this task you configure a VMkernel Port Group on your second host.
1. In the Navigator pane, select sa-esxi-02.vclass.local.
2. On the Configure tab, select Networking > VMkernel adapters.
3. Click the Add Networking icon.
a. The Add Networking wizard appears.
4. On the Select connection type page, verify that VMkernel Network Adapter is selected and
click Next.
5. On the Select target device page, click Select an existing standard switch.
6. Click Browse and select vSwitch0.
7. Click OK.
8. Click Next.
9. On the Port properties page, configure the VMkernel network settings.
a. Enter IP Storage in the Network label text box and click Next.
b. On the IPv4 settings page, click Use static IPv4 settings.
c. In the IPv4 address text box, enter 172.20.10.62.
d. Enter 255.255.255.0 in the Subnet mask text box.
e. Verify that the default gateway is set to 172.20.10.10.
f. Click Next.
10. On the Ready to complete page, click Finish.
Task 3: Configure the iSCSI Software Adapter
You configure the iSCSI software adapter on your second ESXi hosts and verify its iSCSI name.
1. In the Navigator pane, select ESXi host sa-esxi-02.vclass.local.
2. On the Configure tab, navigate to Storage and select Storage Adapters.
3. Click the Add Software Adapter icon (the plus
sign). The Add Software Adapter wizard opens.
4. Add software iSCSI adapter is selected.
5. Click OK.
6. In the Storage Adapters list, scroll down and select the newly created iSCSI software adapter.
7. In the Adapter pane, click the Properties tab.
8. Verify that the adapter status is Enabled.
9. Click Edit next to General.
10. Verify that the name shown in the iSCSI Name text box matches
iqn.1998-01.com.vmware:sa-esxi-02-########.
# represents characters that might change.

11. Click OK.
Task 4: Connect the iSCSI Software Adapters to Storage
You connect the iSCSI adapters on the ESXi hosts to directly connect to a remote iSCSI target on
the IP network.
1. In the Storage Adapter pane, click the Network Port Binding tab.
2. Click the Add icon (the plus sign).
3. Select the IP Storage check box and click OK.
4. In the Storage Adapter pane, click Dynamic Discovery, and click Add.
5. On the Add Send Target Server page, enter 172.20.10.10 for the iSCSI server name in
the iSCSI Server text box and click OK.
6. Monitor the Recent Tasks pane and wait for the task to complete.
7. Click the Rescan Storage Adapters icon.
8. When the rescan storage message appears, click OK and wait for the task to complete.
9. In the Storage Adapter pane, click the Devices tab.

10. Verify that five LUNs appear and record the values.

• LUN number
• Capacity
• Operational state
• Hardware Acceleration
The LUNs are hosted by an iSCSI provider and are used to create datastores in later labs.
11. Compare the results for both the hosts.
12. Leave vSphere Client open for the next lab.
13. Inform your instructor that you have completed this lab. If prompted, continue to the next lab.
