Practical No:3

(B) Aim: Configure access to an NFS datastore.
Objective: In this lab, you perform the following tasks:
1. Configure access to an NFS datastore
2. View NFS Storage information
Steps:
Task 1: Configure Access to NFS Datastores
You mount an NFS share to your ESXi hosts and use it as a datastore.
1. If vSphere Client is not active, open your Firefox Web browser, click vSphere Site-A on the
favorite bar, and select vSphere Client (SA-VCSA-01).
2. Log in with the user name administrator@vsphere.local and the password VMware1!.
3. In vSphere Client, click the Menu icon and select Storage.
4. Right-click SA-Datacenter and select Storage > New
Datastore. The New Datastore wizard starts.
5. On the Type page, select NFS and click Next.
6. On the Select NFS version page, select NFS 4.1 and click Next.
7. On the Name and configuration page, enter NFS-Datastore in the Datastore name text box.
8. Enter /NFS-Data as the folder name in the Folder text box.
9. Enter 172.20.10.10 as the NFS server name in the Server text box.
10. Click the Add server icon (the green plus sign).
11. Validate that 172.20.10.10 is added to the Servers to be added box and click Next.
12. On the Configure Kerberos authentication page, accept the default, and click Next.
13. On the Host accessibility page, select both the ESXi hosts and click Next.
14. On the Ready to complete page, verify the NFS settings and click Finish.
15. Verify that your NFS datastore is listed in the Navigator pane.
Task 2: View NFS Storage Information
You view information about your NFS storage and the contents in the NFS datastore.
1. Select your NFS-Datastore datastore in the Navigator pane.
2. Click the Summary tab.
3. View the content pane and record the information about the datastore.
a) Datastore type
b) Capacity of the datastore
c) Free space of the datastore
d) Used space of the datastore
4. Leave vSphere Client open for the next lab.
5. Inform your instructor that you have completed this lab. If prompted, continue to the next lab.
