Practical No: 04
(A) Aim: Create a content library to clone and deploy virtual machines.
Objective: In this lab, you perform the following tasks:
1. Create a Conent Library
2. Clone a VM Tempate to a Template in a content library
3. Deploy a VM from a VM Template in the content library
4. Delete a content library
Steps:
Task 1: Create a Content Library
You create a content library in vSphere Client and populate it with templates, which you can use to
deploy virtual machines or vApps in your virtual environment.
1. If vSphere Client is not active, open your Firefox web browser, click vSphere Site-A on the
favorite bar, and select vSphere Client (SA-VCSA-01).
2. Log in with the user name administrator@vsphere.local and the password VMware1!.
3. In vSphere Client, click the Menu icon and select Content Libraries.

4. In the center pane, click the Create a new content library icon (plus sign) under Content
Libraries.
5. On the Name and location page, enter VM_Library in the Name text box and click Next.
6. In the Configure content library page, verify that Local content library is selected.
7. Select the Publish externally check box, and click Next.
8. In the Add storage page, select iSCSI-Datastore, and click Next.
9. On the Ready to complete page, review the information and click Finish.
10. Wait for this task to finish before you go to the next task.
Task 2: Clone a VM Template to a Template in a Content Library
You clone virtual machines or VM templates from the vCenter Server inventory to templates in the
content library and use them later to provision virtual machines on a cluster or a host. You can also
clone a virtual machine or VM template to update an existing template in the library.
1. In vSphere Client, click the Menu icon and select VMs and Templates.
2. Expand the view of the data center and all folders.
3. Right-click Photon-ForTemplate and select Clone to Template in Library.
4. For Clone as, verify that New template is selected.
5. Under the Name column, select VM_Library.
6. Enter Photon-LibTemplate in the template name text box.
7. Click OK and wait for the task to finish before you go to the next task.
This process takes about 10 minutes.
Task 3: Deploy a Virtual Machine from a VM Template in the Content Library
You use a virtual machine template from a content library to deploy a virtual machine to a host or a
cluster in your vSphere inventory.
1. In vSphere Client, click the Menu icon and select Content Libraries.
2. In Content Libraries, select VM_Library.
3. Click the Templates tab.
4. Right-click Photon-LibTemplate and select New VM from This Template.
5. On the Select name and folder page, enter Photon-FromLib in the Virtual Machine Name text
box.
6. In Select a location for the virtual machine pane, expand sa-vcsa-01.vclass.local, select
SADatacenter and click Next.

7. On the Select a compute resource page, expand SA-Datacenter and select the sa-esxi-
02.vclass.local host.

8. Click Next.
9. On the Review details page, review the information and click Next.
10. On the Select storage page, select Class-Datastore.
11. From the Select virtual disk format drop-down menu, select Thin Provision and click Next.
12. On the Select Networks page, select Production from the Destination Network drop-down menu
and click Next.
13. On the Ready to complete page, review the information and click Finish.
14. In the Recent Tasks pane, monitor the progress of the template deployment task and wait for
completion.
15. In vSphere Client, click the Menu icon and select VMs and Templates.
16. In the navigator pane, select Photon-FromLib.
17. Right-click Photon-FromLib and select Power > Power On.
18. Open a console for the Photon-FromLib virtual machine.
a. On the Summary tab, click Launch Web Console.
19. Verify that the Photon-FromLib virtual machine is running.
20. Close the Web Console for the Photon-FromLib virtual
machine. vSphere Client returns to VMs and Templates.
Task 4: Delete a Content Library
You delete a content library that is no longer required.
1. In vSphere Client, click the Menu icon and select Content Libraries.
2. In Content Libraries, right-click the VM_Library content library and select Delete.
3. In the Delete Content Library confirmation dialog box, click OK to verify the deletion.
4. Leave vSphere Client open for the next lab.

5. Inform your instructor that you have completed this lab. If prompted, continue to the next lab.
