Practical No: 03
(A) Aim: Create and manage VMFS datastores
Objective: In this lab, you perform the following tasks:
1. Create VMFS Datastores for the ESXi host
2. Expand a VMFS Datastore to Consume Unused Space on a LUN
3. Remove a VMFS Datastores
4. Extend a VMFS Datastores
5. Create a Second Shared VMFS Datastores Using iSCSI
Steps:
Task 1: Create VMFS Datastores for the ESXi Host
You set up VMFS datastores on iSCSI-based storage devices to be used as repositories by virtual
machines.
1. If vSphere Client is not active, open your Firefox web browser, click vSphere Site-A Client in
the favorites bar, and select vSphere Client (SA-VCSA-01).
2. Log in with the user name administrator@vsphere.local and the password VMware1!.
3. In vSphere Client, click the Menu icon and select Hosts and Clusters.
4. Right-click SA-Datacenter and select Storage > New Datastore to start the New Datastore wizard.
5. On the Type page, verify that VMFS is selected and click Next.
6. On the Name and device selection page, enter VMFS-2 in the Datastore name text box.
7. From the Select a host to view its accessible disks/LUNs drop-down menu, select your first host
sa-esxi-01.vclass.local.
A LUN list appears.
8. In the LUN list, select LUN 2 and click Next.
9. On the VMFS version page, accept VMFS 6 and click Next.
10. On the Partition configuration page, reduce the LUN size.
a. Move the Datastore Size slider to reduce the LUN size by 3 GB.
b. Click Next.
11. On the Ready to complete page, review the information and click Finish.
12. Right-click SA-Datacenter in the inventory and select Storage > New Datastore.
13. On the Type page, verify that VMFS is selected and click Next.
14. On the Name and device selection page, enter VMFS-3 in the Datastore name text box.

15. From the Select a host to view its accessible disks/LUNs drop-down menu, select sa-esxi-
02.vclass.local.

A LUN list appears.
16. From the LUN list, select LUN 3 and click Next.
17. On the VMFS version page, accept VMFS 6 and click Next.
18. On the Partition configuration page, accept the default (full capacity) and click Next.
19. On the Ready to complete page, review the information and click Finish.
20. Monitor the progress in the Recent Tasks pane until the task is completed.
21. In the Navigator pane, click the Storage icon.
22. Expand SA-Datacenter, verify that the VMFS-2 and VMFS-3 datastores are listed in the datastore
inventory.
23. In the datastore inventory, click the VMFS-2 datastore.
24. Click the Summary tab and record the value for storage capacity.
Task 2: Expand a VMFS Datastore to Consume Unused Space on a LUN
You dynamically increase the capacity of a VMFS datastore when more space is required by virtual
machines.

1. In the Navigator pane, right-click the VMFS-2 datastore and select Increase Datastore Capacity
to open the Increase Datastore Capacity wizard.
2. On the Select Device page, select LUN 2.
3. Yes should appear in the Expandable column of LUN 2.
4. Click Next.
5. On the Specify Configuration page, accept Use “Free Space 3.00 GB” to expand the datastore
from the Partition configuration drop-down menu and click Next.
6. On the Ready to Complete page, review the information and click Finish.
7. When the task is completed, select the VMFS-2 datastore in the Navigator pane.
8. On the Summary tab, verify that the datastore size is increased to the maximum capacity, minus
the space required for system overhead.
The new capacity for the VMFS-2 datastore should be 9.75 GB.
Task 3: Remove a VMFS Datastore
You can delete any type of VMFS datastore, including the copies that you mounted without
resignaturing. When you delete a datastore, it is destroyed and removed from all hosts.
1. In the Navigator pane, right-click the VMFS-3 datastore and select Delete Datastore.
2. When the Confirm Delete Datastore message appears, click Yes and wait for the task to be complete.
3. In Recent Tasks, verify that the remove datastore task has completed.
4. Verify that the VMFS-3 datastore has been removed from the Navigator pane.
Task 4: Extend a VMFS Datastore
You extend the capacity of a VMFS datastore when extra storage space is needed. You use a second
LUN to extend the size of a datastore based on the first LUN.
1. In Navigator pane, click the VMFS-2 datastore.
2. Click the Configure tab.
3. Select General from the center pane and click Increase.
The Increase Datastore Capacity wizard starts.
4. On the Select Device page, select LUN 3 and click Next.
5. On the Specify Configuration page, select Use all available partitions from the Partition
Configuration drop-down menu and click Next.
The following message is expected: There is no extent of the datastore on this device. Selecting
any configuration option will add a new extent to the datastore.
6. On the Ready to Complete page, review the information and click Finish.
7. When the task completes, refresh the page and select Device Backing in the middle pane.
8. Verify that two extent device names appear in the Extent Name pane.
The Extent Name pane should show both of your assigned devices. You might need to adjust the
size of the Extent Name pane to view all the extent names.
The screenshot shows the two extents listed in the Extent Name pane and the slider to adjust the
size of the pane.
9. Click the Summary tab.
10. Record the new value for Total Capacity in the Summary tab. The
value should be different from the value seen in task 2, step 7.
11. On the Summary tab, click the Hosts tab in right pane.
The two hosts are connected, indicating that this new datastore is shared between your two ESXi
hosts.
12. Right-click your VMFS-2 datastore in the Navigator pane and select Rename.
13. In the Enter the new name text box, enter Shared-VMFS.
14. Click OK.
Task 5: Create a Second Shared VMFS Datastore Using iSCSI
You use an iSCSI shared LUN to create a VMFS6 file system.
1. In vSphere Client, click the Menu icon and select Hosts and Clusters.
2. Right-click SA-Datacenter and select Storage > New
Datastore. The New Datastore wizard starts.
3. On the Type page, verify that VMFS is selected and click Next.
4. On the Name and device selection page, in the Datastore name text box enter iSCSIDatastore.

5. From the Select a host to view its accessible disks/LUNs drop-down menu, select sa-esxi-
01.vclass.local.

A LUN list appears.
6. From the newly displayed LUN list, select LUN 5 named MSFT iSCSI Disk (Capacity 139.85
GB) and click Next.
7. On the VMFS version page, accept VMFS 6 and click Next.
8. On the Partition configuration page, accept Use all available partitions and click Next.
9. On the Ready to complete page, review the information and click Finish.
10. Click the Storage icon in the navigator pane.
11. Verify that iSCSI-Datastore is listed in the Storage view.
12. On the Configure tab, select Connectivity and Multipathing to verify that both hosts can see the
datastore.
13. Leave vSphere Client open for the next lab.
14. Inform your instructor that you have completed this lab. If prompted, continue to the next lab.
