Practical No: 02
(A) Aim: Create a standard switch and a port group.
Objective: In this lab, you perform the following tasks:
1. View the Standard Switch Configuration
2. Create a Standard Switch with a Virtual Machine Port Group
3. Attach Your Virtual Machines to the New Virtual Machine Port Group
4. In this lab, you use vSphere Client to perform the tasks.
Steps:
Task 1: View the Standard Switch Configuration
You view the VMware vSphere® standard switch settings to ensure proper configuration of the
default switch.
1. Open your Firefox web browser, click vSphere Site-A on the favorite bar and select vSphere
Client (SA-VCSA-01).
2. Log in with the user name administrator@vsphere.local and the password VMware1!.
3. vSphere Client opens to the Hosts and Clusters view in the Navigator pane.
4. In the Navigator pane, click the arrows to expand the view.
5. Select sa-esxi-01.vclass.local, click on the Configure tab, and select Virtual switches in the
middle pane.
6. In the Virtual switches pane, select the displayed virtual switch and review the information about
the virtual switch.
Task 2: Create a Standard Switch with a Virtual Machine Port Group
You create a virtual machine port group on a standard switch, which handles network traffic at
the host level in your vSphere environment.
1. In the center pane, click Add Networking
The sa-esxi-01.vclass.local - Add Networking wizard opens.
2. On the Select connection type page, click Virtual Machine Port Group for a Standard Switch
and click Next.
3. On the Select target device page, click New standard switch and click Next.
4. On the Create a Standard Switch page, click the Add adapters icon (the green plus sign).
5. Select vmnic3 and click OK.
6. Review the information for the new active adapter and click Next.
7. On the Connection settings page, enter Production in the Network label text box and click Next.
8. On the Ready to complete page, verify that the information is accurate and click Finish.
9. In the Virtual switches pane, select vSwitch1.
The vSwitch1 standard switch and the Production port group are added to the Virtual switches
pane. You might need to click and move the adjustment slider that divides the Virtual switches
pane and the detail pane to display the newly created standard switch. You can also minimize the
Recent Tasks pane.
10. Repeat task 2 for your second ESXi host sa-esxi-02.vclass.local
Task 3: Attach Your Virtual Machines to the New Virtual Machine Port Group
You attach the virtual machine to the virtual machine port group so that the virtual machine can
communicate with other networked devices.
1. In vSphere Client, click the Menu icon and select VMs and Templates.
2. In the Navigator pane, click the arrows to expand the view of your Datacenter and folders.
3. In the Navigator pane, select the Win10-01 virtual machine.
When repeating this task, select the Win10-02 virtual machine.
4. Ensure that Win10-01 is powered on.
5. Right-click the virtual machine and select Edit Settings.
6. In Edit Settings, find Network adapter 1.

7. Click the downward arrow next to VM Network, and click Browse.
8. In Select Network, select Production and click OK.
9. Expand Network adapter 1 and verify that the Connect At Power On and Connected check
boxes are selected.
10. Click OK to close the Edit Settings window.
11. Renew the virtual machine’s IP address.
a. From the Summary tab, click Launch Web Console.
b. You are logged in to the virtual machine as vclass\administrator with the password
VMware1!.
c. Right click the Windows icon and select Run.
d. In the Run dialog box, enter cmd and click OK to open a Command Prompt window.
e. At the command prompt, run the ipconfig /release command.
f. Run the ipconfig /renew command.
g. Record the virtual machine’s IP address.
h. Record the virtual machine’s default gateway.
12. At the virtual machine’s command prompt, ping the Production network’s default gateway
172.20.11.10 to verify that the virtual machine is connected to the network.
Your ping should be successful. If it is not successful, ask your instructor for help.
13. Power on the Win10-02 virtual machine, and repeat steps 5 through 11.
14. Close the Command Prompt and Web Console for both the virtual machines.
15. Leave vSphere Client open for the next lab.
16. Inform your instructor that you have completed this lab. If prompted, continue to the next lab.
