(C)Aim: Deploy a new virtual machine from a template and clone a virtual machine.
Objective: In this lab, you perform the following tasks:
1. Create a Virtual Machine Template
2. Create Customization Specifications
3. Deploy a VM from a Template
Steps:
Task 1: Create a Virtual Machine Template

You create a template to securely preserve a virtual machine configuration and easily deploy new
virtual machines from the template.
1. If vSphere Client is not active, open your Firefox web browser, click vSphere Site-A on the
favorite bar, and select vSphere Client (SA-VCSA-01).
2. Log in with the user name administrator@vsphere.local and the password VMware1!.
3. In vSphere Client, click the Menu icon and select VMs and Templates.
4. Right-click the Win10-01virtual machine and select Power > Shut Down Guest OS.
5. Click Yes to verify shut down and wait for the virtual machine to power off completely.
6. Right-click the Win10-01 virtual machine and select Template > Convert to Template.
7. Click Yes to verify the conversion.
8. Right-click the Win10-01 virtual machine template and select Move To Folder.
9. Select Templates in the Move to Folder pane and click OK.
10. Expand the Templates folder.
11. Right-click the Win10-01 virtual machine template and select Rename.
12. Enter Win10-Template and click OK.
Task 2: Create Customization Specifications
You save the guest operating system settings in a customization specification file, which is applied
when you clone virtual machines or deploy virtual machines from templates.
1. In vSphere Client, click the Menu icon and select Policies and Profiles.
2. Under Policies and Profiles, click VM Customization Specification and click the Create a new
specification icon.
The New VM Guest Customization Spec wizard opens.
3. On the Name and target OS page, enter Win10-CustomSpec in the Customization Spec Name
text box.
4. Verify that sa-vcsa-01.vclass.local shows next to vCenter Server.
5. Under Guest OS, verify that Windows is selected as the Target guest OS.
6. Verify that Generate a new security identity (SID) is selected.
7. Click Next.
8. On the Registration Information page, enter VMware Student in the Owner name text box, and
enter VMware in the Owner organization text box.
9. Click Next.
10. On the Computer Name page, select Use the virtual machine name and click Next.
11. On the Enter Windows License page, leave the product key text box blank, leave other settings at
their defaults and click Next.
12. On the Administrator Password page, enter the password VMware1! and verify it.
13. Click Next.
14. On the Time Zone page, select (GMT-08:00) Pacific Time (US & Canada) from the Time Zone
drop-down menu and click Next.
15. On the Commands to Run Once page, click Next.
16. On the Network page, verify that Use standard network settings for the guest operating
system, including enabling DHCP on all network interfaces is selected and click Next.
17. On the Workgroup or Domain page, verify that Workgroup is clicked and that the text box shows
WORKGROUP.
18. Click Next.
19. On the Ready to complete page, review the information and click Finish.
20. In the Customization Specification Manager pane, verify that Win10-CustomSpec is listed.
Task 3: Deploy a Virtual Machine from a Template
You use templates to rapidly deploy and provision new virtual machines and easily customize the
guest operating systems.
1. Click the Menu icon and select VMs and Templates.
2. Right-click Win10-Template and select New VM from this
Template. The Deploy From Template wizard opens.
3. On the Select a name and folder page, enter Win10-03 in the Virtual machine name text box.

4. In the Select a location for the virtual machine page, expand SA-Datacenter and select the Lab
VMs folder.
5. Click Next.

6. On the Select a compute resource page, expand SA-Datacenter > Lab Servers and select saesxi-
01.vclass.local.

The Compatibility pane displays the Compatibility checks succeeded message.
7. Click Next.
8. On the Select storage page, select iSCSI-Datastore from the Storage Compatibility:
Compatible list.
The Compatibility pane displays the Compatibility checks succeeded message.
9. From the Select virtual disk format drop-down list, select Thin Provision.
10. Click Next.
11. On the Select clone options page, select the Customize the operating system and the Power on
virtual machine after creation check boxes and click Next.
12. On the Customize guest OS page, select Win10-CustomSpec and click Next.
13. On the Ready to complete page, review the information and click Finish.
14. Repeat steps 2 through 13 to create another virtual machine on your second host named Win10-04.
15. In the Recent Tasks pane, monitor the progress of the two template deployment tasks and wait for
their completion.
16. Open a console for each of the newly created virtual machines.
a. In the Navigator pane of vSphere Client, right-click the Win10-03 virtual machine and
select Open Remote Console.
An alternative to using Remote Console is the Web Console launched from the virtual
machine Summary tab.
b. In the Invalid Security Certificate screen, select the Always trust this host with this
certificate check box.
c. Click Connect Anyway.
When the virtual machine console opens, you might see the Windows setup process continuing. It
automatically reboots a few times to complete the process.
17. You are logged in as vclass\administrator with the password VMware1!.
18. Verify that both IOMETER and CPUBUSY are on the desktop.
19. Verify that VMware Tools is installed by navigating to the Windows system tray at the lower
right corner to show hidden icons and double-click the VMware Tools icon.
20. Repeat steps 16 through 18 for the Win10-04 virtual machine.
21. Close the virtual machine console for both virtual machines.
Since Remote Console is used, close Remote Console on the task bar and close the empty Firefox
tab for each virtual machine.
22. Leave vSphere Client open for the next lab.
23. Inform your instructor that you have completed this lab. If prompted, continue to the next lab
