Practical No: 10
(A) Aim: Implement a vSphere DRS cluster
Objective: In this lab, you perform the following tasks:
1. Create a Load Imbalance
2. Create a vSphere DRS Cluster
3. Verify Proper vSphere DRS Cluster Functionality
4. Create, Test, and Disable a VM-VM Affinity Rule
5. Create, Test, and Disable an Anti-Affinity Rule
6. Create, Test, and Disable a VM-Host Affinity Rule
In this lab, you use vSphere Web Client to perform the tasks.
Steps:
Task 1: Create a Load Imbalance
You create a load imbalance across the ESXi hosts in the SA-Compute-01 cluster to test how VMware
vSphere® Distributed Resource SchedulerTM works.
1. If vSphere Web Client is not active, open your Firefox Web browser, click vSphere Site-A on the
favorite bar, and select vSphere Web Client (SA-VCSA-01).
2. Log in with the user name administrator@vsphere.local and the password VMware1!.
3. Click the Home icon and select Hosts and Clusters.
4. Select sa-esxi-01.vclass.local. 114 Lab 17 Implementing vSphere DRS Clusters
5. On the VMs tab, if virtual machines are present on sa-esxi-01.vclass.local, migrate the virtual
machines to sa-esxi-02.vclass.local.
IMPORTANT: Change compute resource only when migrating VMs.
6. In the Navigator pane, select sa-esxi-02.vclass.local.
7. On the VMs tab, click Virtual Machines.
Compare the list of VMs shown in the list to the VMs shown in the Navigator pane.
8. Ensure that all the VMs are powered on.
9. Start the CPUBUSY script on each of the virtual machines.
a. Right-click Win10-02 and select Open Console.
b. You are logged in as vclass\administrator with the password VMware1!.
c. Right-click the CPUBUSY script on each virtual machine’s desktop and select Open with
Command Prompt.
The number of running CPUBUSY instances required to cause vSphere DRS to migrate
virtual machines to another host varies, depending on the resource capacity of the lab
infrastructure. c. Repeat steps a through c for Win10-03 and Win10-04.
Task 2: Create a vSphere DRS Cluster
You create a vSphere DRS cluster to balance the computing capacity among all the ESXi hosts and
the associated virtual machines without service interruption.
1. In the Navigator pane, right-click the SA-Compute-01 cluster and select Settings.
2. Select vSphere DRS from the middle pane.
3. Click Edit. The Edit Cluster Settings wizard opens.
4. Select the Turn On vSphere DRS check box.
5. Select Manual from the DRS Automation drop-down menu.

6. Click the arrow next to DRS Automation to expand the view and move the Migration Threshold
slider to Aggressive, which is to the right side of the slider.
7. Leave other settings at their default values and click OK.
Task 3: Verify Proper vSphere DRS Cluster Functionality
You can run vSphere DRS in either manual, partially automated, or fully-automated modes. In the
manual mode, you review the recommendations for optimal virtual machine placement provided by
vSphere DRS and decide whether to make the changes.
1. Click the Monitor tab and click vSphere DRS.
If you do not see the expected buttons, refresh vSphere Web Client.
2. Click Run DRS Now.
Clicking the button forces vSphere DRS to immediately evaluate the cluster and provide
recommendations instead of waiting for the standard 5 minutes before generating
recommendations.
3. Click the Summary tab and click the arrow next to vSphere DRS to expand the
pane. The screenshot shows the expanded view of the vSphere DRS pane.
Q1. Does the gauge show that the load is imbalanced?
Yes. Because all the virtual machines are running on a single host and the running CPUBUSY
instances create a large CPU load.
4. Click the Monitor tab, on vSphere DRS, and select CPU Utilization.
5. In the Sum of Virtual Machine CPU Utilization - Per Host pane, view the CPU consumption on
each ESXi host and click each of the colored boxes to view the CPU consumption of each virtual
machine.
6. In the middle pane, select Recommendations and view the vSphere DRS recommendations.
The screenshot shows a sample recommendation made by vSphere DRS to migrate a virtual
machine from one host to another host.
If vSphere DRS recommendations do not appear, refresh vSphere Web Client.
7. Click Apply Recommendations.
If your recommendations have expired, click Run DRS Now to generate new recommendations
and apply them.
If new recommendations do not appear, refresh your browser.
You may need to click Run DRS Now and click Apply Recommendations the second time.
8. On the Monitor tab and click Tasks & Events.
9. Select Tasks in the middle pane.
10. Click the Expand All icon.
11. Monitor the Migrate virtual machine task until completion
12. Click vSphere DRS and click Run DRS Now to force vSphere DRS to evaluate the cluster
status. Q2. Is any recommendation shown?
No. Because all recommendations are applied.
13. Click the Summary tab and view the vSphere DRS pane.
Q3. Does the gauge show that the load is balanced?
The resource allocation balance improves after applying the vSphere DRS recommendations.
14. Click the Monitor tab and click the vSphere DRS tab.
15. Select CPU Utilization.
The virtual machines should spread across the two ESXi hosts. You can refresh the screen to see
the result.
16. In each virtual machine console, press Ctrl+C to stop the CPUBUSY script. 17. Close the virtual
machine consoles.
Task 4: Create, Test, and Disable a VM-VM Affinity Rule
You use VM-VM affinity rules to specify whether the selected individual virtual machines should run
on the same host or be kept on separate hosts.
1. In the Navigator pane, select SA-Compute-01 and click the VMs tab.
2. Point to the gray row of column names, right-click the row, and select Show/Hide Columns.
3. Select the Host check box from the list and click OK.
The Host column appears in the table.
You can drag the Host column to the left so that it is easily visible.

4. Based on the information in the Name and Host columns, verify that all the virtual machines are
not running on a single ESXi host.
Having virtual machines reside on two different ESXi hosts is necessary to test the validity of the
VM/Host rule that you create in the later steps. If you have one virtual machine on each ESXi
host in the cluster, no action is necessary.
5. In the Navigator pane, right-click SA-Compute-01 and select Settings.
6. Select VM/Host Rules in the middle pane.
7. In the VM/Host Rules pane, click Add. The Create VM/Host Rule dialog box appears.
8. Configure the options for the VM/Host rule.
a. In the Name text box, enter Colocate-Win10-VMs.
b. Leave the Enable rule check box selected.
c. From the Type drop-down menu, select Keep Virtual Machines Together.
d. Click Add to add members.
e. Select the check boxes for the Win10-02 and Win10-03 virtual machines and click OK.
9. Click OK to close the Create VM/Host Rules dialog box.
10. Click the Monitor tab and click vSphere DRS.
11. Select Recommendations and click Run DRS Now.
Q1. Do you see any recommendations, and why?
Yes. vSphere DRS recommends that the two virtual machines be migrated to other hosts.
The first recommendation moves Win10-03 off of the sa-esxi-01.vclass.local to maintain
cluster balance.
The second migration is based on the vSphere DRS affinity rule that you created. The migrate
Win10-04 recommendation is assigned priority 1 because it is attempting to fix a broken
affinity rule. Therefore, even if vSphere DRS was configured to Conservative, this
recommendation would appear.
12. Click Apply Recommendations and wait for the virtual machine migrations to complete.
The virtual machines associated with your affinity rule should be migrated to one of the two hosts
in the vSphere DRS cluster.
13. Click the Monitor tab and click Tasks & Events to view the progress of the virtual machine
migration and wait for its completion.
14. Click the VMs tab.
15. Click the Host column heading to sort the virtual machines by the ESXi host on which they
reside The Win10-02 and Win10-03 virtual machines should be running on the same ESXi host.
16. Click the Configure tab, and select VM/Host Rules in the middle pane.
17. In the VM/Host Rules pane, select your affinity rule and click Edit above the rule.
18. Deselect the Enable rule check box and click OK.
Task 5: Create, Test, and Disable an Anti-Affinity Rule
You create a vSphere DRS anti-affinity rule to force the specified virtual machines to be kept on
separate hosts.
1. In the VM/Host Rules pane, click Add.
2. Configure the options for this VM/Host rule.
a. In the Name text box, enter Separate-Win10-VMs.
b. Keep the Enable rule check box selected.
c. From the Type drop-down menu, select Separate Virtual Machines.
d. Click Add.
e. Select the check boxes for the Win10-02 and Win10-03 virtual machines own and click
OK.

3. Click OK to close the Create VM/Host Rules dialog box.
4. Click the Monitor tab and click vSphere DRS.
5. In Recommendations and click Run DRS Now.
If new recommendations do not appear, refresh vSphere Web Client.
The new recommendation is marked as priority 1 as a result of your vSphere DRS rules.
6. Click Apply Recommendations.

7. Click the Monitor tab and click Tasks & Events to view the progress of the virtual machine
migration and wait for the virtual machine migration to complete before you proceed to the next
step.
8. Click the VMs tab.
9. View the information shown in the Host column.
As a result of your anti-affinity rule, you should see that the virtual machines associated with your
anti-affinity rule are placed on two different ESXi hosts.
10. Click the Configure tab and return to VM/Host Rules.
11. In the VM/Host Rules pane, select the Separate-Win10-VMs rule.
12. Click Delete above the pane and click Yes to verify the deletion.
Task 6: Create, Test, and Disable a VM-Host Affinity Rule
You use VM-Host affinity rules to specify whether the members of a selected virtual machine
vSphere DRS group can run on the members of a specific host vSphere DRS group.
1. In the middle pane, select VM/Host Groups.
2. In the VM/Host Groups pane, click Add.
3. In Create VM/Host Group dialog box, configure the options for this rule.
a. In the Name text box, enter Win10-VMs.
b. Verify that VM Group is selected from the Type drop-down menu.
c. Click Add.
d. Select the check boxes for the Win10-03 and Win10-04 virtual machines.
e. Click OK.
f. Click OK to close the dialog box.
4. In the VM/Host Groups pane, click Add.
5. When the Create VM/Host Group dialog box appears, configure the options.
a. In the Name text box, enter Win10-Host.
b. From the Type drop-down menu, select Host Group.
c. Click Add.
d. Select the check box for sa-esxi-02.vclass.local and click OK.
e. Click OK to close the dialog box.
6. Select VM/Host Rules in the middle pane.
7. In the VM/Host Rules pane, click Add.
8. When the Create VM/Host Rules dialog box appears, configure the options.
a. In the Name text box, enter Run-only-on-host2.
b. Keep the Enable rule check box selected.
c. From the Type drop-down menu, select Virtual Machines to Hosts.
d. From the VM Group drop-down menu, select Win10-VMs.
e. Select Must run on hosts in group from the drop-down menu.
f. From the Host Group drop-down menu, select Win10-Host.
g. Click OK to close the dialog box.
9. Click the Monitor tab and click vSphere DRS.
10. Select Recommendations in the middle pane and click Run DRS Now.
1. vSphere DRS recommends that one of your Win10 virtual machine be migrated to a
different host due to the violation of your VM/Host affinity rule. The other Win10 virtual
machine is already running on the second host.
11. If there are recommendations, click Apply Recommendations.
12. Click the Monitor tab and click Tasks & Events to view the progress of the virtual machine
migration and wait for its completion.
The Win10 virtual machines are migrated as necessary so that they both reside on the second
ESXi host.
13. Click the VMs tab.
14. Click the Host column heading to sort the virtual machines by the ESXi host on which they reside.
Your Win10-03 and Win10-04 virtual machines that were running on different ESXi hosts are
both running on sa-esxi-02.vclass.local.
15. In the Navigator pane, right-click the Win10-03 virtual machine and select Migrate. The Migrate
wizard starts.

16. On the Select the migration type page, click Change computer resource only and click Next.
17. On the Select a compute resource page, click Clusters and click SA-Compute-01.

In the Compatibility pane, you might notice the Virtual machine 'Win10-03' on host 'sa-esxi-
01.	vclass.local' would violate a virtual machine - host affinity rule message.

This issue is due to a conflict of the rules that you created and your migration attempt.
18. Click Cancel to cancel the migration.
19. Return to the Configure tab, and select VM/Host Rules in the middle pane.
20. In the VM/Host Rules pane, select your Run-only-on-host2 rule and click Edit above the rule.
21. Deselect the Enable rule check box and click OK.
22. Leave vSphere Web Client open for the next lab.
23. Inform your instructor that you have completed this lab. If prompted, continue to the next lab.
