(B) Aim: Install, configure, and use vSphere Update Manager.
Objective: In this lab, you perform the following tasks:
1. Modify the Cluster Settings
2. Configure vSphere Update Manager
3. Create a Patch Baseline
4. Attach a Baseline and Scan for Updates
5. Stage the Patches onto the ESXi Host
6. Remediate the ESXi Host
In this lab, you use vSphere Web Client to perform the tasks.
Steps:
Task 1: Modify the Cluster Settings
You enable vSphere DRS in the fully-automated mode so that vSphere DRS determines the best possible
distribution of virtual machines among your ESXi hosts and automatically performs the migration.
1. On the vSphere Web Client Home page, select Hosts and Clusters.
2. If not already selected, select SA-Compute-01 in the Navigator pane.
3. Right-click SA-Compute-01 and select Settings.
4. Select vSphere DRS and click Edit.
The Edit Cluster Settings dialog box appears.
5. On the vSphere DRS page, select Fully Automated from the DRS Automation drop-down menu.
This operation enables vSphere DRS to migrate virtual machines as necessary without asking
permission from an administrator.
6. In the left pane of the Edit Cluster Settings window, select Admission Control.
7. Verify that Disabled is selected from the Define Host Failover capacity By drop-down menu.
8. Click OK.
9. Click the Monitor tab for SA-Compute-01, then click the Resource Reservation tab.
10. Select CPU and review the Reservation (MHz) column to verify that no CPU reservations are
assigned to virtual machines.
11. Select Memory and review the Reservation (MB) column to verify that no memory reservations
are assigned to virtual machines.
CAUTION Removing CPU and memory reservations is necessary in this lab environment for
training purposes. In a production environment, you might not need to remove them.
Task 2: Configure vSphere Update Manager
You can import patches and extensions manually by using an offline bundle, or you can use a shared
repository or the Internet as the download source for patches and extensions.
1. Click the Home icon and select Update Manager.
2. In the Navigator pane, select sa-vcsa-01.vclass.local.
3. In the right pane, click the Manage tab.
4. In the middle pane, select Download Settings.
5. In the Download Settings pane, click Import Patches.
6. Click Browse, navigate to the Desktop\Class Materials and Licenses\Class Folder, select the
ESXi670-2018xxxxx.zip file, and click Open.
7. Wait until the patch bundle has been uploaded and the Patch file upload is successful message is
displayed.
8. Click Next.

9. If a security warning appears, select the Install this certificate and do not display any security
warnings check box and click Ignore.
10. When the import operation is complete, click Finish.
Task 3: Create a Patch Baseline
You create a baseline to specify the requirements that should be met by vSphere objects, such as
virtual machines, ESXi hosts, or virtual appliances. Your patch baseline contains a collection of
patches, extensions, or upgrades.
1. Click the Hosts Baselines tab, and click New Baseline to open the New Baseline wizard.
2. On the Name and Type page, enter ESXi Host Update in the Name text box.
3. In the Description text box, enter Patch for ESXi Host 6.7 and click Next.
4. On the Patch Options page, click Fixed and click Next.
5. On the Patches page, select all patches from the list.
6. Click Next.
7. On the Ready to Complete page, click Finish
Task 4: Attach a Baseline and Scan for Updates
You use scanning to evaluate a set of hosts, virtual machines, or virtual appliances against the
patches, extensions, and upgrades that are included in the attached baselines and baseline groups.
1. On the top-right corner of the Baselines tab, click Go to compliance view.
2. In the Navigator pane, select sa-esxi-02.vclass.local and click the Update Manager tab in the right
pane
3. Click Attach Baseline. The Attach Baseline or Baseline Group dialog box appears.
4. Select the ESXi Host Update check box and click OK.
5. Click Scan for Updates.
6. In the Scan for Updates window, verify that the Patches and Extensions and Upgrades check
boxes are both selected and click OK.
7. Monitor the Recent Tasks pane and wait for the scan to complete.
8. Select the ESXi Host Update baseline in the Baseline list and verify that the ESXi host is listed as
noncompliant in the center bottom pane.
Task 5: Stage the Patches onto the ESXi Host
You stage patches and extensions onto the ESXi hosts so that they are available locally when the
remediation process takes place. This method speeds up remediation.
1. In vSphere Web Client, if not already selected, select sa-esxi-02.vclass.local in the Navigator
pane.
2. In the right pane, click Stage
Patches. The Stage wizard starts
3. On the Baselines page, select the ESXi Host Update baseline and click Next.
4. On the Hosts page, verify that the sa-esxi-02.vclass.local host is selected and click Next.
5. On the Patches and Extension page, accept the default settings and click Next.
6. On the Ready to Complete page, review the information and click Finish.
7. Monitor the Recent Tasks pane for the staging tasks to complete.
Task 6: Remediate the ESXi Host
You temporarily disable cluster features, such as VMware vSphere® Distributed Power
ManagementTM in the cluster and apply the patches to the ESXi host.
1. In vSphere Web Client, if not already selected, select sa-esxi-02.vclass.local in the Navigator pane.
2. In the right pane, click Remediate. The Remediate wizard starts.
3. On the Select Baselines page, select the ESXi Host Update baseline and click Next.
4. On the Select Target objects page, verify that sa-esxi-02.vclass.local is selected and click Next.
5. On the Patches and Extensions page, leave the default settings and click Next.
6. On the Advanced Options page, select the Schedule this action to run later check box.
7. Enter Remediate sa-esxi-02 ESXi host on SA-Compute-01 in the Task Name text box
8. For Remediation Time, enter a time that is 3 minutes from the current time and leave the other
settings at their default values.
9. Click Next.
10. On the Host Remediation Options page, select the Disable any removeable media devices connected
to the virtual machines on the host check box and leave the other settings at their default values.
11. Click Next.

12. On the Cluster Remediation Options page, deselect the Disable Distributed Power Management
(DPM) if it is enabled for any of the selected clusters check box and click Next. 13. On the Ready
to Complete page, review the information and click Finish.
13. Monitor the Recent Tasks pane. If the expected results are not seen, refresh vSphere Web
Client. Q1. Was the ESXi host patched successfully?
Yes.
14. Close vSphere Web Client.
This is the last VMware vSphere 6.7 Install, Configure, Manage lab.
15. Inform your instructor that you have completed all labs for this class
