(B) Aim: Modify a virtual machine’s hardware and add a raw LUN to a virtual machine.
Objective: In this lab, you perform the following tasks:
1. Clone a Powered-On VM
2. Increase the Size of a VMDK File
3. Adjust Memory Allocation on a VM
4. Rename a VM in the vCenter Server Appliance Inventory
5. Add and Remove a Raw LUN on a VM
Steps:
Task 1: Clone a Powered-On Virtual Machine
You clone a virtual machine to create a new virtual machine with the same virtual hardware,installed
software, configuration, and other properties. The original virtual machine can be powered on, off, or
suspended.
1. If vSphere Client is not active, open your Firefox web browser, click vSphere Site-A on the
favorite bar, and select vSphere Client (SA-VCSA-01).
2. Log in with the user name administrator@vsphere.local and the password VMware1!.
3. In vSphere Client, click the Menu icon, and select VMs and Templates.
4. In the Navigator pane, expand the SA-Datacenter and the Lab VMs folder.
5. Ensure the Win10-02 virtual machine is powered on.
6. Right-click the Win10-02 virtual machine and select Clone > Clone to Virtual
Machine. The Clone Existing Virtual Machine wizard starts.
7. On the Select a name and folder page, enter Win10-Clone in the Virtual machine text box.
8. Expand SA-Datacenter and select Lab VMs from the Select a location for the virtual machine
pane and click Next.
9. On the select a compute resource page, expand Lab Servers and select sa-esxi-02.vclass.local
from the Select a compute resource pane and click Next.
10. On the Select storage page, select iSCSI-Datastore.
11. Select Thin Provision from the Select virtual disk format drop-down menu and click Next.
12. On the Select clone options page, select the Customize the operating system and the Power on
virtual machine after creation check boxes.
13. Click Next.
14. On the Customize guest OS page, select Win10-CustomSpec and click Next.
15. On the Ready to complete page, review the information and click Finish.
16. Monitor the progress of the task in the Recent Tasks
pane. This task takes 10 minutes to complete.
17. Open a console for the Win10-Clone virtual machine.
a. In the Navigator pane of vSphere Client, right-click the Win10-Clone virtual machine
and select Open Remote Console.
When the virtual machine console opens, you might see the Windows setup process
continuing. It automatically reboots a few times to complete the process.
b. You are logged in as vclass\administrator with the password VMware1!.
c. Verify that VMware Tools is installed by navigating to the Windows system tray at the
lower-right corner to show hidden icons and double-click the VMware Tools icon.

18. Close the virtual machine console.
Task 2: Increase the Size of a VMDK File
You increase the size of the virtual machine disk (VMDK) and configure the guest operating system
to detect the additional space.
1. Right-click your Win10-Clone virtual machine in the Navigator pane and select Edit Settings.
2. On the Virtual Hardware tab, record the size (GB) of Hard Disk 1.
3. In the Hard disk 1 text box, increase the disk size by 2 GB and click OK.
4. On the Win10-Clone Summary tab, select Launch Web Console.
5. Configure the Win10-Clone virtual machine’s guest operating system to detect and extend the
increased disk space.
a. Right-click Start, then click on Disk Management.
b. In the lower-right pane, verify that the 2 GB unallocated disk space is discovered.

If the 2.00 GB of unallocated space has not been discovered, click the Action menu, and select
Rescan Disks.
c. Right-click the C: drive and select Extend
Volume. The Extend Volume wizard starts.
d. Click Next.
e. On the Select Disks page, verify that Disk 0 is selected in the Selected pane and click Next.
f. On the Completing the Extend Volume Wizard page, review the information and click
Finish.

6. In the Disk Management window, verify that the local C: drive (Disk 0) is extended.
7. Record the value for the total size of the C: drive.
8. Compare the value with the value that you recorded in step 2.
9. Close the Disk Management window.
10. Close the virtual machine console.
Task 3: Adjust Memory Allocation on a Virtual Machine
You add, change, or configure virtual machine memory resources or options to enhance virtual
machine performance.
1. Right-click the Win10-Clone virtual machine and select Power > Shut Down Guest OS from the
Navigator pane.
2. Click Yes to verify the shutdown.
3. On the Win10-Clone Summary tab expand the view of the VM Hardware pane and record the
4. amount (GB) of active memory.
5. Right-click the Win10-Clone virtual machine in the Navigator pane, and select Edit Settings.
6. Enter 2500 in the Memory text box and verify that MB is selected from the drop-down menu.
7. Click OK.
8. Verify that the memory is increased on the virtual machine’s Summary tab.
Task 4: Rename a Virtual Machine in the vCenter Server Appliance Inventory
You rename an existing virtual machine in the vCenter Server Appliance inventory.
1. In the Navigator pane, right-click the Win10-Clone virtual machine and select Rename.
2. In the Enter the new name text box, enter Win10-05.
3. Click OK.
4. In the Navigator pane, select Win10-05 virtual machine and click the Datastores tab.
5. Right-click iSCSI-Datastore and select Browse Files.
Task 5: Add and Remove a Raw LUN on a Virtual Machine
You use raw device mapping (RDM) to enable a virtual machine to access a LUN directly.
1. Click the VMs and Templates icon.
2. Right-click the Win10-05 virtual machine and select Edit Settings.
3. Select RDM Disk from the New device drop-down menu.
4. In the Select Target LUN dialog box, select LUN 4 and click OK.
5. Click the arrow next to New Hard disk to expand the view.
6. In the Location drop-down menu, verify that Store with the virtual machine is selected.
7. Select Virtual from the Compatibility Mode drop-down menu, and click OK.
8. Verify that the guest operating system can see the new disk.
a. In the Navigator pane, right-click the Win10-05 virtual machine and select Power >
Power On.
b. Right-click the Win10-05 virtual machine and select Open Remote Console.
c. You are logged in as vclass\administrator with the password VMware1!.
d. Right-click Start, then click on Disk Management.
e. When the Initialize Disk wizard starts, click Cancel.
f. Verify that Disk 1 is listed.
g. Close the Disk Management window.
9. Close the virtual machine console and the Firefox browser tab.
10. In vSphere Client, remove the RDM hard disk from the Win10-05 virtual machine.
a. Right-click the Win10-05 virtual machine and select Power > Shut Down Guest OS.
b. Click Yes to verify the shut down and wait for the virtual machine to power off.
c. Right-click the Win10-05 virtual machine and click Edit Settings.

d. Point to Hard disk 2 in the edit setting dialog box.
e. Click the x icon that appears at the right side of the row for Hard disk 2.
f. Select the Delete files from datastore check box and click OK.
11. Leave vSphere Client open for the next lab.
12. Inform your instructor that you have completed this lab. If prompted, continue to the next lab.
