Practical No: 06
Aim: Perform virtual machine management tasks
Objective: In this lab, you perform the following tasks:
1. Unregister a Virtual Machine from the vCenter Server Appliance Inventory
2. Register a Virtual Machine in the vCenter Server Appliance Inventory
3. Unregister and Delete Virtual Machines from the Datastore
4. Take Snapshots of a Virtual Machine
5. Add Files and Take Another Snapshot of a Virtual Machine
6. Revert the Virtual Machine to a Snapshot
7. Delete an Individual Snapshot
8. Delete All Snapshots In this lab, you use vSphere Client to perform the tasks.
Steps:
Task 1: Unregister a Virtual Machine from the vCenter Server Appliance Inventory
You unregister a virtual machine from the vCenter Server Appliance inventory. Unregistering does
not delete the virtual machine from the datastore.
1. If vSphere Client is not active, open your Firefox web browser, click vSphere Site-A on the
favorite bar, and select vSphere Client (SA-VCSA-01).

2. Log in with the user name administrator@vsphere.local and the password VMware1!.
3. Click the Menu icon and select VMs and Templates.
4. Select theWin10-05 virtual machine and click the Datastores tab.
5. Record the VMFS datastore name where the Win10-05 virtual machine resides.
6. Verify that the Win10-05 virtual machine is powered off.
7. Right-click Win10-05 and select Remove from Inventory.
a. CAUTION
b. Do not select Delete from Disk. This operation is not recoverable in your lab environment.
8. Click Yes to verify the removal.
9. Verify that the Win10-05 virtual machine no longer appears in the Navigator.
10. If needed, click the Refresh icon for vSphere Client.
11. In the Navigator pane, click the Storage icon and expand the view.
12. Click the datastore name that you recorded in step 5.
13. In the right pane, verify that the Files tab is open.
14. View the folders in the middle pane.
Q1. Does a folder named Win10-05 exist?
No, a folder named Win10-05 does not exist. When the Win10-05 virtual machine was first
created, the virtual machine and its folder were named after the original virtual machine,
Win10- Clone. When the virtual machine was renamed from Win10-Clone to Win10-05, the
folder was not renamed.
15. In the middle pane, select the Win10-Clone folder.
16. In the right pane, view the Win10-Clone virtual machine files
MSC IT Part-II(Sem-IV) Server Virtualization on VMware Platform Year-2023-24
Task 2: Register a Virtual Machine in the vCenter Server Appliance Inventory
If you removed a virtual machine from the vCenter Server Appliance inventory but did not remove its
folder from the managed host’s datastore, you can return the virtual machine back to the inventory by
registering the virtual machine’s .vmx file with vCenter Server Appliance.
1. In the right pane, click the Win10-Clone.vmx file from the list of virtual machine files in the right
pane.
2. Click the Register VM icon.
The screenshot shows an example of registering the Win10-Clone.vmx file
On the Select a name and folder page, enter Win10-05.
3. In the Select a location for the virtual machine pane, expand SA-Datacenter and select the Lab
VMs folder.
4. Click Next.
5. In the Select a compute resource page, expand SA-Datacenter > Lab Servers.
6. Select sa-esxi-01.vclass.local and click Next.
7. On the Ready to Complete page, review the information and click Finish.
8. In the Navigator pane, click the VMs and Templates icon and verify that the Win10-05
virtual machine is in the Lab VMs folder.
Task 3: Unregister and Delete Virtual Machines from the Datastore
You can remove a virtual machine from the vCenter Server Appliance inventory and delete all the
associated virtual machine files from the datastore, including the configuration file and the virtual
disk files.
1. In the Navigator pane right-click the Win10-05 virtual machine, select Delete from Disk, and
click Yes to verify the deletion.
2. Verify that the Win10-05 virtual machine no longer appears in the Navigator pane.
3. Click the Storage icon and verify that the folder and files where the Win10-05 virtual machine
was registered no longer exist.
4. Click the VMs and Templates icon.
Right-click the Photon-FromLib virtual machine, select Delete from Disk, and click Yes to verify
the deletion.
Task 4: Take Snapshots of a Virtual Machine
You take a snapshot to preserve the state and the data of a virtual machine at the time the snapshot
is taken. You use snapshots when you must revert to the same virtual machine state.

1. In the Navigator pane, right-click the Win10-03 virtual machine and select Open Remote Console.
2. You are logged in as vclass\administrator with the password VMware1!.
3. On the virtual machine desktop, drag the IOMETER file to the Recycle Bin.
4. Right-click the Recycle Bin icon and select Empty Recycle Bin to delete the IOMETER file
permanently.
5. Click Yes to verify the file deletion and leave the virtual machine console open.
6. Return to vSphere Client.
a. Click the VMware Remote Console icon in the Windows Tool bar. Clicking
the VMware Remote Console icon minimizes the console window.
7. Right-click the Win10-03 virtual machine.
8. Select Snapshots > Take Snapshot.
a. The Take Snapshot wizard appears

9. Click OK and monitor the task in the Recent Tasks pane.
10. Click the VMware Remote Console icon to return to the virtual machine desktop.
11. On the virtual machine desktop, drag the CPUBUSY file to the Recycle Bin.
12. Right-click the Recycle Bin icon and select Empty Recycle Bin to delete the CPUBUSY file
permanently.
13. Click Yes to verify the file deletion and leave the virtual machine console open.
14. Return to vSphere Client.
15. Right-click the Win10-03 virtual machine and select Snapshots > Take Snapshot to take
another snapshot.
16. Configure the snapshot

17. Click OK and monitor the task in the Recent Tasks pane.
Task 5: Add Files and Take Another Snapshot of a Virtual Machine
You add some files to a virtual machine and create another snapshot of the virtual machine. This
snapshot contain files that allow you to see how the virtual machines change when you revert to the
different snapshots in subsequent tasks.
1. Connect the ClassFiles-vSphere.iso file on the CD/DVD drive to the Win10-03 virtual machine.
a. Right-click the Win10-03 virtual machine and select Edit Settings.
b. Select Datastore ISO File from the CD/DVD drive 1 drop-down menu.
c. Select Class-Datastore in the left pane.
d. Select the Classfiles-vSphere.iso file in the middle pane.
e. Click OK.
f. Select the Connected check box for CD/DVD drive 1.
g. Click OK to close the Edit Settings dialog box.

2. Return to the Win10-03 virtual machine console.
3. Click the Windows Start icon and navigate to Windows System > This PC.
4. Click DVD Drive (D:) to view files.
5. Copy the CPUBUSY VBScript Script file from the D: drive to the virtual machine’s desktop.
6. Close the DVD Drive (D:) CDROM window.
7. Return to vSphere Client and disconnect the CD/DVD drive from the Win10-03 virtual machine. a.
From vSphere Client, right-click the Win10-03 virtual machine and select Edit Settings.
b. Select Client Device from the CD/DVD drive 1 drop-down menu and click OK.
8. Right-click the Win10-03 virtual machine and select Snapshots > Take Snapshot to take another
snapshot.
9. Configure the snapshot

10. Click OK.
11. Monitor the task in the Recent Tasks pane and wait for completion.
This task takes slightly longer than previous snapshots because the guest memory is also being
saved.
12. Right-click the Win10-03 virtual machine and select Snapshots > Manage Snapshots.
You should see three snapshots. The difference in icons is due to whether the Snapshot the virtual
machine’s memory check box was selected when the snapshot was taken.
13. Leave the Manage Snapshots open.
14. Close the Win10-03 virtual machine console.
a. Right click the VMware Remote Console icon in the Windows Tool bar and select Close
Window.
b. Close the empty browser tab
Task 6 Revert the Virtual Machine to a Snapshot
You revert a virtual machine to the state it had at the time when the selected snapshot was taken.
1. In Manage Snapshots, select the Without iometer or cpubusy snapshot and click Revert to.
2. Click OK to verify the revert.
3. Click Done to close Manage Snapshots.

1) Yes. The virtual machine powered off because the memory state was not preserved.
4. In the Navigator pane, right-click the Win10-03 virtual machine and select Power > Power On.
5. In the Navigator pane, right-click Win10-03 and select Open Remote Console.
Wait for the boot process to complete.
6. You are logged in as vclass\administrator with the password
VMware1!. Q2. Is either IOMETER or CPUBUSY on the desktop?
2) No. You removed these files before creating the snapshot named Without iometer
or cpubusy.

7. Close the Win10-03 virtual machine console.
8. In vSphere Client, right-click the Win10-03 virtual machine and select Snapshots > Manage
Snapshots.
The You Are Here pointer should be below the snapshot named Without iometer or cpubusy.
9. Select the With cpubusy snapshot on the Manage Snapshots tab and click Revert to.
10. Click OK to verify the revert operation.

11. Click Done to close Manage Snapshots.

3) No. The virtual machine did not power off because the memory state was preserved.

12. Open a console for the Win10-03 virtual machine.
Q4. Is CPUBUSY on the desktop?
4) Yes.
Q5. Is IOMETER on the desktop?
5) No.

Task 7: Delete an Individual Snapshot
You can remove a snapshot on the Snapshots tab. The snapshot files are consolidated and written to
the parent snapshot disk.
1. Return to vSphere Client.
2. In the Navigator pane, right-click the Win10-03 virtual machine and select Snapshots > Manage
Snapshots.
The You are here pointer must be below the With cpubusy snapshot.
3. Select the Without iometer or cpubusy snapshot and click the DELETE button.
4. Click OK to verify the deletion.
5. Click Done to close Manage Snapshots.
6. Q1. Did the virtual machine power off?
7. No.
Q2. In the virtual machine console, is the CPUBUSY file on the desktop?
8. Yes. The CPUBUSY file is still on the desktop because deleting the snapshot does not change the
virtual machine's current state. Deleting the snapshot removes the ability to return to that
snapshot's point in time.
Task 8: Delete All Snapshots
You can use the Delete All function to delete all the snapshots of a virtual machine.
1. In the Navigator pane, right-click the Win10-03 virtual machine and select Snapshots > Manage
Snapshots.
2. In Manage Snapshots click Delete All.
3. Click OK to verify that you want to delete all the remaining snapshots.
Only the You are here pointer should appear on the snapshots tab.
Q1. Were all the remaining snapshots deleted from the Manage Snapshots dialog box? Yes.
4. Click Done to close Manage Snapshots.
5. Return to the Win10-03 virtual machine console.
Q2. Is CPUBUSY on the desktop, and why?
Yes. The current state of the virtual machine is not altered. Snapshots are consolidated and
then removed. An option to revert to those earlier points in time is no longer available.
6. Close the Win10-03 virtual machine console.
7. Close vSphere Client.
8. vSphere Web Client is used in the next lab.
9. Inform your instructor that you have completed this lab. If prompted, continue to the next lab.
