Practical No: 08
Aim: Use the vCenter Server Appliance alarm feature
Objective: In this lab, you will perform the following tasks
1. Create a Virtual Machine Alarm to Monitor a Condition
2. Create a Virtual Machine Alarm to Monitor an Event
3. Trigger Virtual Machine Alarms and Acknowledge the Alarms
4. Disable Virtual Machine Alarms
In this lab, you use vSphere Web Client to perform the tasks.
Steps:
Task 1: Create a Virtual Machine Alarm to Monitor a Condition
You create and use alarms to respond to selected events, conditions, and states that occur with objects
in the vCenter Server inventory.
1. If vSphere Web Client is not active, open your Firefox web browser, click vSphere Site-A on the
favorite bar, and select vSphere Web Client (SA-VCSA-01).
2. Log in with the user name administrator@vsphere.local and the password VMware1!.
3. Click the Home icon and select Hosts and Clusters

4. In the Navigator pane, right-click the Win10-02 virtual machine and select Alarms > New Alarm
Definition to open the New Alarm Definition wizard.
NOTE
Because you are creating an alarm for the Win10-02 virtual machine, this alarm monitors only
that virtual machine. If you set the alarm on an object higher in the vCenter Server inventory, the
alarm applies to multiple virtual machines. For example, if you create an alarm on the vCenter
Server Appliance object, the alarm applies to all the virtual machine
5. Enter VM CPU Usage - Win10-02 in the General page Alarm name text box and click Next.
6. On the Triggers page, click Add (the green plus sign) to add the trigger conditions.
The screenshot shows the results of adding the trigger conditions.
7. Click Next
8. In the Actions page, click Add (the green plus sign) to configure the action settings.
9. Click Finish.
10. In the Navigator pane, select the Win10-02 virtual machine and click the Monitor tab.
11. On the Issues tab and select Alarm Definitions.
9. Verify that the VM CPU Usage - Win10-02 alarm appears in the alarm list for the Win10-02
Virtual machine.
Task 2: Create a Virtual Machine Alarm to Monitor an Event
You set up general alarm settings, alarm triggers, trigger reporting, and alarm actions to monitor and
react to a specified event.
1. In the Navigator pane, select SA-Datacenter, and click the Monitor tab.
2. On the Issues tab and select Alarm Definitions.
3. Click Add (the green plus sign) to add an alarm for the data
center. The New Alarm Definition wizard starts.
4. Configure the alarm settings in the New Alarm Definition wizard General page.
5. Click Next
6. On the Triggers page, click Add (the green plus sign) in the pane named Trigger if ANY of the
following events occur.
7. Select VM suspended from the Event drop-down menu.
8. Click Add (the green plus sign) to specify the conditions for the alarm trigger to fire.
9. Click Next.
10. Leave the default settings in the Actions page and click Finish.
11. Verify that the VM Suspended - Win10-02 alarm appears in the alarm list for the data center.
Task 3: Trigger Virtual Machine Alarms and Acknowledge the Alarms
You acknowledge an alarm to discontinue it and inform others that you are taking ownership of the
issue. Your acknowledged alarms are visible in the system. The alarms are neither cleared nor reset.
1. Power on the Win10-02 virtual machine.
2. In the Navigator pane, select the Win10-02 virtual machine.
3. On the Monitor tab, click Issues and select Triggered Alarms. The triggered alarms appear in this
pane.
4. Open the console for the Win10-02 virtual machine.
5. You are logged in to the Win10-02 virtual machine as vclass\administrator with the password
VMware1!.
6. Right-click CPUBUSY and select Open with Command Prompt.
7. Wait for at least 30 seconds before the alarm is triggered and the virtual machine is suspended
8. Return to vSphere Web Client, refresh the Triggered Alarms pane and verify that the VM Suspended
- Win10-02 alarm is triggered.
An entry for this alarm should appear in the Triggered Alarms list
9. Right-click the VM Suspended - Win10-02 alarm and select Reset to Green.
10. On the Monitor tab, click Tasks & Events and select Events in the middle pane. The description
Manually cleared alarm ‘VM Suspend - Win10-02 ’ from Red should appear in the list.
11. In the Navigator pane, right-click the suspended Win10-02 virtual machine and select Power >
Power On.
12. Reload and open the Win10-02 virtual machine console.
13. Press Ctrl+C at the command prompt to stop the CPUBUSY script.

14. Close the Win10-02 virtual machine console.
15. Right-click the Win10-02 virtual machine and select Power > Shut Down Guest OS.
16. Click Yes to verify the Guest Shut Down operation.
17. Verify that the red alert icon is removed from the Win10-02 virtual machine in the Navigator pane.
Task 4: Disable Virtual Machine Alarms
You disable system built-in alarms or the alarms that you defined for specific objects.
1. Disable the VM CPU Usage - Win10-02 alarm.
a. In the Navigator pane, select the Win10-02 virtual machine.
b. On the Monitor tab, click Issues and select Alarm Definitions.
c. Select the VM CPU Usage - Win10-02 alarm in the list. The VM CPU Usage - Win10-02
pane appears in the right pane.
d. Click Edit.
e. On the General page, deselect the Enable this alarm check box and click Finish
2. Disable the VM Suspended - Win10-02 alarm.
a. Select SA-Datacenter in the Navigator pane.
b. On the Monitor tab in the middle pane, click Issues and select Alarm Definitions.
c. Enter VM suspended in the search box.
d. Right-click the VM Suspended - Win10-02 alarm in the list and select Edit.
e. On the General page, deselect the Enable this alarm check box and click Finish.
3. Leave vSphere Web Client open for the next lab.
4. Inform your instructor that you have completed this lab. If prompted, continue to the next lab.
