Practical No: 09
Aim: Use vSphere HA functionality
Objective: In this lab, you perform the following tasks:
1. Create a Cluster Enabled for vSphere HA
2. Add Your ESXi Hosts to the Cluster
3. Test the vSphere HA Functionality
4. View the vSphere HA Cluster Resource Usage
5. Manage vSphere HA Slot Size
6. Configure a vSphere HA Cluster with Strict Admission Control
7. Prepare for the Next Lab
In this lab, you use vSphere Web Client to perform the tasks.
Steps:
Task 1: Create a Cluster Enabled for vSphere HA
You create a VMware vSphere® High Availability cluster to group multiple ESXi hosts together, to
achieve higher levels of virtual machine availability than each ESXi host can provide individually.
1. If vSphere Web Client is not active, open your Firefox web browser, click vSphere Site-A on the
favorite bar, and select vSphere Web Client (SA-VCSA-01).
2. Log in with the user name administrator@vsphere.local and the password VMware1!.
3. Click the Home icon and select Hosts and Clusters.
4. Right-click the SA-Datacenter object in the Navigator pane and select New
Cluster. The New Cluster dialog box appears.
5. Configure the new cluster.
6. Leave the default settings for the other options and click OK.
7. In the Recent Tasks pane, monitor the progress as the cluster is created.
Task 2: Add Your ESXi Hosts to the Cluster
You plan the resources and networking architecture of your cluster, add hosts to it, and specify the
vSphere HA settings.
1. Add both ESXi hosts to the SA-Compute-01 cluster.
a. Drag sa-esxi-01.vclass.local to SA-Compute-01.
b. Drag sa-esxi-02.vclass.local to SA-Compute-01.
2. Click Yes in the Warning panel.
Your existing resource pools collapse into the cluster root resource pool.
3. Monitor the Recent Tasks pane and wait for the Configuring vSphere HA task to complete. If the
tasks do not appear in the Recent tasks pane, you can find them in the Task Console.

4. In the Navigator pane, select SA-Compute-01 and click the Monitor tab.
5. Click vSphere HA and select Summary in the middle
pane. The vSphere HA summary information appears.
6. Record the name of the master host.
Q1. Does the number of protected virtual machines match the number of powered-on virtual
machines in the cluster?
Yes. If both the hosts are added to the cluster and there are no errors on the cluster, the
number of protected VMs equal the number of powered-on VMs.
7. Select Heartbeat in the middle pane.
Q2. How many datastores are used to monitor heartbeat?
Two datastores. Both the datastores are shared by all of the hosts in the cluster. Therefore,
they are automatically selected for heartbeating.
8. In the middle pane, select Configuration Issues and review the errors that are displayed.
At this point, each ESXi host has a single management network port. vSphere HA still works if an
ESXi host is configured with one management network port, but a second management network
port is necessary for management network port redundancy.
9. Select sa-esxi-01.vclass.local in the Navigator pane and click the Configure tab.
10. In the middle pane, navigate to Networking and select VMkernel adapters.
11. Select the vMotion VMkernel adapter.
12. Click the Edit Settings icon.
13. On the Port properties page, ensure that the vMotion check box is selected and select the
Management check box.
14. Click OK.
15. In the Navigator pane, right-click sa-esxi-01.vclass.local and select Reconfigure for vSphere HA.
NOTE
You might need to refresh vSphere Web Client to eliminate any obsolete alarm icons.
16. Repeat step 9 through 15 for sa-esxi-02.vclass.local.
17. In the Navigator pane, select SA-Compute-01 and click the Monitor tab.
18. Click Issues and select All Issues from the middle pane.
Q3. Are the previous management configuration issues still
displayed? The management network error messages disappear
Task 3: Test the vSphere HA Functionality
You set up vSphere HA to monitor the cluster environment and detect hardware failures. When an
ESXi host outage is detected, vSphere HA automatically restarts the virtual machines on the other
ESXi hosts in the cluster.
1. In the Navigator pane, select the master ESXi host that you recorded in task 2, step 6.
2. Click the VMs tab and ensure that Virtual Machines is selected.
3. Power on the Win10-02 virtual machine.
4. Record the name of one or more powered-on virtual machines on the master host.
5. In the Navigator pane, select SA-Compute-01.
6. On the Monitor tab, click vSphere HA and select Summary from the middle pane.
7. In the Virtual Machines pane, verify that the Protected field matches the number of powered-on
VMs within the cluster and that the Unprotected field value is 0.
Verifying that Virtual Machines Unprotected field value is 0 indicates that it is safe to reboot the
host.
8. Simulate a host failure by rebooting the master host in the cluster.
IMPORTANT
Ensure that you reboot the system. Do not shut down the system.
a. Right-click the master ESXi host and select Power > Reboot.
A warning message appears stating that you chose to reboot the host, which is not in
maintenance mode.
b. Enter Testing vSphere HA as the reason for rebooting and click OK.
9. On the Monitor tab, click Tasks & Events and select Events in the middle pane.
The cluster entries are sorted by time. Note the entries that appear when the host failure was
detected.

The initial messages from the hosts might show failures. These messages indicate that the virtual
machines on the downed host have failed. The virtual machines take 1 to 2 minutes to
successfully restart on the new host.
10. Wait for an additional 1 to 2 minutes for the ESXi host that you rebooted in step 5 to enter an
error state.
11. In the Navigator pane, select the ESXi host that is in an error state, indicated with a red error icon
12. Click the VMs tab.
Q1. Do you see the virtual machines that were running on the original master ESXi host,
which you recorded earlier?
No. The virtual machines previously running on the original master ESXi host are running on
the remaining host in the cluster.
13. In the Navigator pane, select SA-Compute-01.
14. On the Monitor tab, click vSphere HA.
15. In the middle pane, select Summary.
16. Monitor the original master ESXi host in the Navigator pane until it is fully running again. It
might take 5 minutes for the original master host to become fully running.
Task 4: View the vSphere HA Cluster Resource Usage
You examine the CPU, memory, and storage I/O resource usage information of the cluster.
1. On the Monitor tab, click Resource Reservation.
2. Select CPU from the middle pane and record the information for the cluster.
a. Total Reservation Capacity (GHz)
b. Used Reservation (GHz)
c. Available Reservation (GHz)
3. In the bottom pane, verify that the CPU reservation is not set on the virtual
machines. The Reservation column shows 0 (MHz).
4. In the middle pane, select Memory and record the information for the cluster.

• Total Reservation Capacity (GB)
• Used Reservation (GB)
• Available Reservation (GB)

5. In the bottom pane, verify that the memory reservation is not set on the virtual machines. The
Reservation column shows 0 (MB).
Task 5: Manage vSphere HA Slot Size
You configure admission control to ensure that sufficient resources are available in a cluster to
provide failover protection and to ensure that the virtual machine resource reservations are respected.
1. In the Navigation pane, right-click SA-Compute-01 and select Settings.
2. Navigate to Services, and select vSphere Availability.
3. In the right pane, click Edit.
4. In the left pane, select Admission Control.
5. In the Define host failover capacity by drop-down menu, select Slot Policy (powered-on VMs)
and click OK.
6. In the right pane, click the Monitor tab.
7. Click vSphere HA, and select Summary from the middle pane.
8. In the right pane, scroll down to the Advanced Runtime Info pane and record the slot information
for this cluster.
a. Slot size: CPU (MHz), Memory (MB)
b. Total slots in cluster
c. Used slots
d. Available slots
e. Failover slots
9. In the Navigator pane, click the VMs and Templates icon.
10. Expand SA-Datacenter > Lab VMs, and power on the Win10-04 virtual machine.
11. Set the CPU reservation on the Win10-04 virtual machine.
a. Right-click the Win10-04 virtual machine and select Edit Settings.
b. Click the arrow next to CPU to expand the view.
c. In the Reservation text box, enter 512 (MHz) and click OK.
12. In the Navigator pane, click the Hosts and Clusters icon.

13. In the Navigator pane select SA-Compute-01.
14. Return to the Advanced Runtime Info pane and view the slot information for this cluster.
a. In the Advanced Runtime Info pane, verify that the slot size for the CPU changed from
the value recorded in step 8.
b. Record the information shown in the Slot size text box. Slot size: CPU (MHz),
Memory (MB)

15. Use the vSphere HA slot size policy to enforce a slot size.
a. In the Navigator pane, right-click SA-Compute-01 and select Settings.
b. In the middle pane select vSphere Availability and click Edit. The Edit Cluster Settings
wizard opens.
c. In the left pane, select Admission Control.
d. In the Define host failover capacity by pane, click Fixed slot size.
e. In the CPU slot size text box, enter 300 (MHz) to change the CPU slot size.
f. Click Calculate next to VMs requiring multiple slots, then click the View
link. The VMs Requiring Multiple Slots window appears.
g. Record the Required Slots value for the Win10-04 virtual machine.
Because the CPU slot size has a fixed value of 300 MHz, the Win10-04 virtual
machine with the 512 MHz CPU reservation uses two slots to power on.
h. Click Close and click OK to exit the Edit Cluster Settings window.
16. View the slot information for the SA-Compute-01 cluster.
a. Return to the Advanced Runtime Info pane, record the information shown in the Slot size
text box and compare with the values recorded earlier.

17. Remove the vSphere HA fixed slot size setting.
a. In the Navigator pane, right-click SA-Compute-01 and select Settings.
b. In the middle pane, select vSphere Availability and click Edit. The Edit Cluster Settings
wizard opens.
c. In the left pane, select Admission Control.
d. In the Define host failover capacity by pane, select Cover all powered-on virtual
machines for the slot size policy.
e. Click OK.
18. Remove the CPU reservation on the Win10-04 virtual machine.
a. In the Navigator pane, right-click the Win10-04 virtual machine and select Edit Settings.
b. Click the arrow next to CPU to expand the view.
c. Enter 0 (MHz) in the Reservation text box and click OK.
Task 6: Configure a vSphere HA Cluster with Strict Admission Control
You use admission control to impose constraints on resource usage and ensure that sufficient
resources are available in a cluster to provide failover protection. Any actions violating the constraints
are not permitted.
In the previous task, when you configured the cluster under Define host failover capacity, you
configured vSphere HA to calculate slots. vSphere HA calculates the space for a virtual machine to
run based on the largest CPU and memory reservation across all powered-on virtual machines in the
cluster. This feature is called strict admission control.
1. Shut down the Guest OS for all the virtual machines.
2. Verify the shut down operation and wait for the process to compete. Wait another minute for the
system to release the memory.
3. In the Navigator pane, select SA-Compute-01 and click the Summary tab.
4. Record the memory information for this cluster.
i. Capacity (total)
ii. Used
iii. Free
Q1. Why is the free memory value for the cluster less than the total memory capacity
value? Less memory is available because of the overhead needed to run VMkernel.
VMkernel is holding back memory for its own use.

5. Click the Monitor tab, click Resource Reservation, and select Memory in the middle pane.

6. Assign a 2000 MB memory reservation to the Win10-02 virtual machine.
a. In the lower pane, right-click the Win10-02 virtual machine and select Edit Resource
Settings.
b. In the Memory memory pane, enter 2000 (MB) in the Reservation text box and click OK.
c. Repeat steps a through c to set the memory reservation on the Win10-03 and Win10-04
virtual machines.

7. On the Monitor tab, and click vSphere HA.
8. Select Summary in the middle pane.
9. In the Advanced Runtime Info pane, record the value shown in the Total slots in cluster text box.
Q2. Why does vSphere Web Client report N/A as the value?
vSphere Web Client reports N/A for the total number of slots because no virtual machines are
powered on yet. The slot size calculation considers only virtual machines that are powered on.
10. In the Navigator pane, right-click the Win10-02 virtual machine and select Power > Power On.

11. Return to the Advanced Runtime Info pane of SA-Compute-01 and click Refresh in the lower-
right corner of the pane.

12. Record the slot size values that appear.
13. View the effect that powering on this virtual machine has on your cluster.
Q3. How many total slots in the cluster, used slots, available slots, and failover slots do you
see?
You should see 4 total slots in the cluster: one used slot, one available slots, and 2 failover
slots. If you do not see 4 slots, refresh vSphere Web Client after 2 minutes and the numbers
should get updated.
NOTE
The Advanced Runtime Info pane might display a smaller number of available slots in the cluster than
you expect.
Slot size is calculated using the largest reservations plus the memory overhead of any powered on
virtual machines in the cluster. However, vSphere HA admission control considers only the resources
on a host that are available for virtual machines. This amount is less than the total amount of physical
resources on the host, because some overhead exists.
Q4. How is the memory slot size calculated?
Unlike the CPU slot size calculation, which is based solely on the largest CPU reservation, the
calculation for memory slot size is based on the largest memory reservation, plus memory
overhead.
14. In the Navigator pane, right-click the Win10-04 virtual machine and select Power > Power On.
15. Return to the Advanced Runtime Info pane of SA-Compute-01 and click Refresh.
16. View the slot information.
Q5. How many slots are available and what is the reason?
Zero slots are available. Only two slots were available, the rest were marked as failover slots.
Because two virtual machines were powered on, each using one of the available slots, no
more slots are available.
17. In the Navigator pane, right-click the Win10-03 virtual machine and select Power > Power On.
18. Monitor the Recent tasks pane.
Q6. Is your virtual machine allowed to power on, and what is the reason?
The Win10-03 virtual machine is not allowed to power on. If a cluster does not have
sufficient resources to provide failover protection, the virtual machine does not power on
resulting in an error.
Task 7: Prepare for the Next Lab
You remove the memory reservations on virtual machines and disable admission control when they
are no longer needed.
1. Remove the memory reservation on each of the virtual machines.
a. Right-click the Win10-02 virtual machine and select Edit Resource Settings.
b. In the Memory section, enter 0 (MB) in the Reservation text box and click OK.

c. Repeat steps a and b to remove the memory reservation on the Win10-03 and Win10-04
virtual machines.

2. In the Navigator pane, right-click the Lab Servers folder and select Remove from Inventory.
3. Click Yes to verify the operation.
4. Edit the settings of the cluster to allow the number of running virtual machines to exceed the
failover capacity of the cluster.
a. In the Navigator pane, right-click SA-Compute-01 and select Settings.
b. In the middle pane, select vSphere Availability and click Edit. The Edit Cluster Settings
wizard opens. c. In the left pane, click Admission Control. d. From the Define host failover
capacity by drop-down menu, select Disabled. e. Click OK to commit your changes.
5. Right-click the Win10-03 virtual machine in the Navigator pane and select Power > Power On.
6. Leave vSphere Web Client open for the next lab.
7. Inform your instructor that you have completed this lab. If prompted, continue to the next lab.
