(B) Aim: Use the system monitoring tools to reflect the CPU workload.
Objective: In this lab, you perform the following tasks:
1. Create the CPU Workload
2. Use Performance Charts to Monitor CPU Utilization
3. Undo Changes Made to the Virtual Machines
In this lab, you use vSphere Web Client to perform the tasks.
Steps:
Task 1: Create the CPU Workload
You run the CPUBUSY script in each virtual machine to create heavy CPU workload in your lab
environment for testing.
1. If vSphere Web Client is not active, open your Firefox web browser, click vSphere Site-A on the
favorite bar, and select vSphere Web Client (SA-VCSA-01).
2. Log in with the user name administrator@vsphere.local and the password VMware1!.
3. Click the Home icon and select VMs and Templates.
4. Expand the view of the Navigator pane.
5. Validate that the Win10-02 and Win10-04 virtual machines are powered on.
6. Open consoles for Win10-02 and Win10-04.
7. On each virtual machine desktop, right-click the CPUBUSY script file and select Open with
Command Prompt.
Task 2: Use Performance Charts to Monitor CPU Utilization
You use the performance charts to monitor the CPU, memory, disk, network, and storage metrics.
1. Return to vSphere Web Client.
2. In the Navigator pane, select the Win10-02 virtual machine.
3. Click the Monitor tab, click Performance and select Advanced in the middle pane. The real-time
CPU usage graph appears.
4. Click the Chart Options link.
The Chart Options dialog box appears.
5. Verify that CPU is selected in the Chart Metrics pane.
6. In the Timespan drop-down menu, verify that Real-time is selected.
7. In the Select object for this chart pane on the right, deselect the Win10-02 virtual machine check
box.

8. In the Select counters for this chart pane, click None to deselect all counters.
9. In the Select counters for this chart pane, select the Ready and Used check boxes and click
OK. The CPU/Real-time chart for the Win10-02 virtual machine opens.
10. Open a new tab in your Firefox web browser and click the vSphere Web Client shortcut.
11. Click the Home icon and select VMs and Templates and expand the view.
12. In the Navigator pane, select the Win10-04 virtual machine.
13. Repeat steps 3 through 9 to configure the CPU Performance graph for the Win10-04 virtual
machine.
14. In the web browser window for each virtual machine, point to the end of the line graph to view
the current CPU ready value.
15. Record the current CPU ready value for each virtual machine and leave the Performance Chart
windows open.
• Win10-02
• Win10-04
16. In each virtual machine console, press Ctrl+C in the Command Prompt window to stop the
CPUBUSY script. CAUTION This script must be stopped in each virtual machine. If the script is
left running, the next lab is affected.
17. In the vSphere Web Client browser window for each virtual machine, point to the end of the line
graph to view the current CPU ready value.
18. Wait for the chart to be updated and compare the CPU ready value with what you recorded in step
Performance charts update every 20 seconds.
Q1. Did the CPU ready value change? If it did, what is the reason for the change?
Yes. After the scripts stop, the CPU Ready value decreases significantly because CPU
contention does not occur
Task 3: Undo Changes Made to the Virtual Machines
You revert the configuration changes made to each virtual machine.
1. Close the second vSphere Web Client tab and the two virtual machine consoles.
2. In the first vSphere Web Client tab, remove the scheduling affinity value on the Win10-02 virtual
machine.
a. In the Navigator pane, right-click the Win10-02 virtual machine and select Edit Settings.
b. Click the arrow next to CPU to expand the view.
c. In the Scheduling Affinity text box, delete the value 1 and click OK.
3. Repeat step 2 to remove the scheduling affinity value on the Win10-04 virtual machine.
4. Right-click the Win10-02 virtual machine, select Power > Shut Down the Guest OS.
5. Click Yes to verify the guest shut down.
6. Repeat steps 4 and 5 for the Win10-04 virtual machine.
7. Leave vSphere Web Client open for the next lab.
8. Inform your instructor that you have completed this lab. If prompted, continue to the next lab.
