Practical No: 05
Aim: Use vSphere vMotion and vSphere Storage vMotion to migrate virtual machines.
Objective: In this lab, you perform the following tasks:
-
1. Migrate Virtual Machine Files from Local Storage to Shared Storage
2. Create a Virtual Switch and a VMkernel Port Group for vSphere vMotion Migration
3. Prepare Virtual Machines to Demonstrate vSphere vMotion Migration
4. Perform vSphere vMotion Migrations of Virtual Machines
5. Perform Compute Resource and Storage Migrations
In this lab, you use vSphere Client to perform the tasks.
Steps:
Task 1: Migrate Virtual Machine Files from Local Storage to Shared Storage
With VMware vSphere® Storage vMotion®, you can migrate a virtual machine’s disk files from one
datastore to another while the virtual machine is running.
1. If vSphere Client is not active, open your Firefox web browser, click vSphere Site-A on the
favorite bar, and select vSphere Client (SA-VCSA-01).
2. Log in with the user name administrator@vsphere.local and the password VMware1!.
3. Click the Menu icon and select VMs and Templates.
4. Verify that the Win10-02 virtual machine is selected and powered on.
5. On the Summary tab, in the Related Objects pane, record the name of the storage on which the
Win10-02 virtual machine resides
6. Right-click the Win10-02 virtual machine and select Migrate. The Migrate wizard opens.
7. Select Change storage only on the Select a migration type page and click Next.
8. On the Select Storage page, select iSCSI-Datastore as the destination storage for the virtual
machine files. In the Compatibility pane, the Compatibility checks succeeded message appears.
9. Click Next.
10. On the Ready to complete page, review the information and click Finish.
11. Monitor the Recent Tasks pane and wait for the virtual machine files relocation process to
complete. This task takes several minutes to complete.
12. Repeat step 5 and step 6 to verify that the Win10-02 virtual machine is on the new datastore,
which is iSCSI-Datastore.
Task 2: Create a Virtual Switch and a VMkernel Port Group for vSphere vMotion
Migration You create a VMkernel port group virtual switch to move virtual machines from one host
to another while maintaining continuous service availability.
1. Click the Menu icon and select Hosts and Clusters.

2. In the Navigator pane, expand SA-Datacenter > Lab Servers and select the host sa-esxi-
01.vclass.local.

3. Click the Configure tab.
4. In the middle pane, navigate to Networking and select Virtual switches.
5. Click the Add Networking icon to open the Add Networking wizard.
6. Accept VMkernel Network Adapter in the Select connection type page and click Next.
7. Select New standard switch in the Select target device page and click Next.
8. Click the green + sign in the Create a Standard Switch page to add a physical adapter to the switch.
9. Select vmnic2 as the vmnic for the vSphere vMotion network and click OK.
10. Review the information shown and click Next.
11. On the Port properties page for connection settings, enter vMotion in the Network label text box
12. Select the vMotion check box, and click Next.
13. On the IPv4 settings page, configure the IP address.
a. Select Use static IPv4 settings.
b. Enter 172.20.12.51 in the IPv4 address text box for the sa-esxi-01.vclass.local host.

c. Enter 255.255.255.0 in the Subnet mask text box for the vMotion VMkernel port IPv4.
d. Click Next.
14. On the Ready to complete page, review the information and click Finish.
15. In the Virtual Switches pane, verify that the new virtual switch for vSphere vMotion migration is
listed.
16. Repeat steps 2-15 for sa-esxi-02.vclass.local, using 172.20.12.52 for the vMotion VMkernel port
IPv4 address in step 13 b. All other steps remain same.
Task 3: Prepare Virtual Machines to Demonstrate vSphere vMotion Migration
You prepare virtual machines to demonstrate live migration between hosts using vMotion.
1. In the Navigator pane, expand the view of the inventory.
2. Right-click the Win10-03 virtual machine and select Edit Settings.
3. On the Virtual Hardware tab, select Client Device from the CD/DVD drive 1 drop-down menu.
4. Click the arrow next to Network adapter 1 to expand the view.
5. Verify that Production is selected from the drop-down menu.
6. Verify that the Connect At Power On check box is selected for Network adapter 1.
7. Click OK. 8. Repeat steps 2 through 7 for the Win10-04 virtual machine.
8. Verify that the Win10-03 virtual machine is powered on.
9. Right-click the Win10-03 virtual machine and select Open Remote Console.
10. You are logged in as vclass\administrator with the password VMware1!
11. Click the Search Windows icon in Windows Task bar and enter cmd to open a Command Prompt
window.
12. When the Command Prompt window opens, enter the ipconfig command and record the virtual
machine’s default gateway IP address.
13. Enter ping -t default_gateway IP address on the command line to start a continuous ping.
Task 4: Perform vSphere vMotion Migrations of Virtual Machines
You perform live migration of virtual machines residing on a shared datastore that is accessible to
both the source and the target ESXi hosts.
1. Leave the virtual machine console open and return to vSphere Client.

2. Migrate the Win10-03 virtual machine from host sa-esxi-01.vclass.local to host sa-
esxi02.vclass.local.

a. In the Navigator pane, right-click the Win10-03 virtual machine and select Migrate.
b. On the Select a migration type page, accept Change compute resource only and click Next.

c. On the Select a compute resource page, select sa-esxi-02.vclass.local. sa-esxi-
02.vclass.local is the destination host to which you migrate the Win10-03 virtual machine.

The migration requirements are validated. If the validation does not succeed, you receive
warning or error messages. You cannot continue with the migration until the errors are
resolved.
d. Click Next
e. On the Select networks page, ensure that Production is selected from the Destination
Network drop-down menu and click Next.
f. Leave Schedule vMotion with high priority (recommended) selected on the Select
vMotion priority page and click Next.
g. On the Ready to complete page, review the information and click Finish.
3. Return to the Win10-03 virtual machine console and monitor that no pings are dropped during the
migration.
a. Monitor the console for 1 to 2 minutes. If the Win10-03 virtual machine console is
disconnected, reopen the console.

4. Press Ctrl+C to stop the ping.
5. Close the Command Prompt window.
6. Close the Win10-03 virtual machine console.
7. Verify that the Win10-04 virtual machine is powered on.
8. In the Navigator pane, select Win10-04.
9. On the Summary tab, verify that Win10-04 is on the sa-esxi-02.vclass.local host.

10. Migrate the Win10-04 virtual machine from host sa-esxi-02.vclass.local to host sa-
esxi01.vclass.local.

a. In the Navigator pane, drag the Win10-04 virtual machine from sa-esxi-02.vclass.local to
sa-esxi-01.vclass.local. The Migrate wizard opens.
b. On the Select a migration type page, select Change compute resource only and click Next.
c. On the Select a compute resource page, select sa-esxi-01.vclass.local and click Next.
d. On the Select networks page, verify that Production is selected from the Destination
Network drop-down menu and click Next.
e. On the Select vMotion priority page, leave Schedule vMotion with high priority
(recommended) selected and click Next.
f. On the Ready to complete page, review the information and click Finish.
11. When the migration tasks are completed, view the Navigator pane to verify that Win10-04 is
under sa-esxi-01.vclass.local and Win10-03 is under sa-esxi-02.vclass.local.
Task 5: Perform Compute Resource and Storage Migrations
You can migrate virtual machines not only to a different host but also to a different datastore across
storage accessibility boundaries.
1. In the Navigator pane, right-click the Photon-FromLib virtual machine and select Migrate.
2. On the Select a migration type page, click Change both compute resource and storage and click
Next.

3. On the Select compute resource page, expand SA-Datacenter > Lab Servers and select saesxi-
01.vclass.local.

a. NOTE
b. If the Compatibility alarm – No guest heartbeats are being received message appears,
ignore it. This message does not affect a successful migration.

4. Click Next.
5. On the Select storage page, select iSCSI-Datastore and click Next.

6. On the Select network page, verify that Production is selected from the Destination Network drop-
down menu and click Next.

7. On the Select vMotion priority page, leave Schedule vMotion with high priority (recommended)
selected and click Next.
8. On the Ready to complete page, review the information and click Finish.
9. In the Recent Tasks pane, monitor the progress of the virtual machine migration.
10. When the migration task is completed, view the Navigator pane to verify that the Photon-From
Lib virtual machine is listed under your sa-esxi-01.vclass.local ESXi host.
11. Right-click Photon-From Lib and select Power > Shut Down Guest OS.
NOTE
If your Shut Down Guest OS option is dimmed, refresh the vSphere Client page and try again.
12. Click Yes to verify the shut down.
13. Inform your instructor that you have completed this lab. If prompted, continue to the next lab.
