
Practical No:1(A)

(A) Aim: Working with vCenter Server Appliance.
Objective: Configure and use vCenter Server Appliance.
1. Access your vCenter Server Appliance and Configure Licenses.
2. Configure Single Sign-On and Create a Data Center Object.
3. Add Your ESXi Hosts to the vCenter Server Inventory.
4. Configure the ESXi Hosts as NTP Clients.
5. Create a Host and Cluster FolderIn the current lab configuration, no datastores have
been configured. Datastores are added in a later lab.
6. Create Virtual Machine and Template Folders.
7. Navigate vSphere Client.
Steps:
Task 1: Access your vCenter Server Appliance and Configure Licenses
You connect to the vSphere Client and license both vCenter Server and ESXi hosts.
1. In your Firefox Web browser, click vSphere Site-A on the favorite bar and select vSphere Client
(SA-VCSA-01).
2. Log in to vCenter Server with the user name administrator@vsphere.local and the password
VMware1!.
3. In vSphere Client, click the Menu icon and select Administration.
4. In the Navigator pane, select Licenses.
5. In the Licenses pane, the Licenses tab is selected.
6. Click the Add New Licenses icon (the plus sign).
7. On the Enter license keys page, enter the vCenter Server and VMware vSphere® Enterprise Plus
EditionTM license keys provided by your instructor in the License keys text box.
You must enter the license keys on separate lines.
8. Verify that both licenses are listed correctly in the text box and click Next.
9. On the Edit license names page, enter VMware vCenter Server and VMware ESXi in the
appropriate License name text boxes.
10. Click Next.
11. On the Ready to complete page, click Finish.
12. In the Licenses pane, click the Assets tab.
13. Select the sa-vcsa-01.vclass.local check box and click Assign License.
14. In Assign License, select the updated vCenter Server license and click OK.
At the bottom of the Assign License page, the Some features will become
unavailable message appears.
15. Close the There are vCenter Server systems with expired or expiring licenses in your inventory
warning.
Task 2: Configure Single Sign-On and Create a Data Center Object
You edit the Single Sign-On (SSO) configuration and create a data center object.
1. In the Administration page, select Single Sign-On > Configuration.
2. On the Policies tab, verify that the Password Policy tab is open and click Edit.
3. In the Maximum lifetime text box, verify that 0 is entered for the password never expires value.
4. Click OK to save
5. Click the Menu icon and select Shortcuts.
6. In the Inventories pane, click Hosts and Clusters
7. In the Navigator pane, right-click sa-vcsa-01.vclass.local and select New Datacenter.
8. In the New Datacenter Name text box, enter SA-Datacenter and click OK.
In the Navigator pane, you should see that the new data center object is listed under vCenter
Server Appliance
Task 3: Add Your ESXi Hosts to the vCenter Server Inventory
You add ESXi hosts to the vCenter Server inventory.
1. In the Navigator pane, right-click SA-Datacenter and select Add
Host. The Add Host wizard appears.
2. On the Name and location page, enter sa-esxi-01.vclass.local and click Next.

3. On the Connection settings page, enter root as the user name, enter the password VMware1!, and
click Next.
4. If you see a security alert stating that the certificate store of vCenter Server cannot verify the
certificate, click Yes to proceed.
5. On the Host summary page, review the information and click Next.
6. On the Assign license page, click the VMware ESXi license key and click Next.
7. On the Lockdown mode page, accept the default Disabled and click Next.
8. On the VM location page, accept the default and click Next.
9. On the Ready to complete page, review the information and click Finish.
10. In the Recent Tasks pane, monitor the progress of the task.
11. Repeat steps 1 through 10 to add sa-esxi-02.vclass.local to the Navigator pane.
12. In the Navigator pane, expand SA-Datacenter.
13. In the Navigator pane, select sa-esxi-01.vclass.local.
The Summary tab opens in the right pane. This tab displays information for the ESXi host, such
as CPU, memory, storage, NICs, and virtual machines.
14. Click the arrow next to the Hardware pane to view the hardware details of the ESXi host.
Task 4: Configure the ESXi Hosts as NTP Clients
You configure the ESXi hosts to use Network Time Protocol (NTP) to maintain accurate time and date.
1. In the right pane, click the Configure tab.
When repeating steps for your second host, select sa-esxi-02.vclass.local from the Navigation pane.
2. Navigate to System in the middle pane, and select Time Configuration to view the current settings.
3. Click Edit.
4. Click Use Network Time Protocol (Enable NTP client).
5. In the NTP Servers text box, verify that 172.20.10.10 is entered.
6. Next to NTP Service Status, select the Start NTP Service check box.
7. From the NTP Service Startup Policy drop-down menu, select Start and stop with host.
8. Click OK.
9. In the Time Configuration pane, verify that the NTP client appears as Enabled and that the NTP
service status appears as Running.
10. Repeat steps 1 though 9 to configure your second ESXi host.
11. On the Summary tab of your second host, suppress the ESXi Shell enabled and SSH enabled
warnings. These warnings are present to alert you of the current host configuration.
In the current lab configuration, no datastores have been configured. Datastores are added in a
later lab.
Task 5: Create a Host and Cluster Folder
You create a folder to group hosts and clusters of the same type.
1. In the upper left-hand corner of vSphere Client, click vSphere Client.
The vSphere Client Shortcuts page opens.
2. Click Hosts and Clusters.
3. In the Navigator pane, right-click SA-Datacenter and select New Folder > New Host and Cluster
Folder.
4. In the Enter a name for the folder text box, enter Lab Servers and click OK.
5. Drag both the ESXi hosts to the Lab Servers folder.
6. In the Recent Tasks pane, monitor the Move Entities tasks until they are completed.
Task 6: Create Virtual Machine and Template Folders
You use folders to group virtual machines of the same type.
1. In vSphere Client, click the Menu icon and select VMs and Templates.
2. Right-click SA-Datacenter and select New Folder > New VM and Template Folder.
3. In the Enter a name for the folder text box, enter Lab VMs and click OK.
4. In the Navigator pane, expand the SA-Datacenter object.
5. Right click the Win10-Empty virtual machine.
6. In the Actions - Win10-Empty menu, click Delete from Disk.
7. In Confirm Delete, click Yes.
8. In the Navigator pane, drag the Win10-01 and Win10-02 virtual machines to the Lab VMs folder.

9. Expand the Lab VMs folder to verify that both virtual machines are in the folder.
10. Right-click SA-Datacenter and select New Folder > New VM and Template Folder to create a
second virtual machine folder.
11. In the Enter a name for the folder text box, enter Templates and click OK.
The Lab VMs and Templates folder that you created in this lab appears in the Navigator pane.
12. Right-click the Labs VMs folder and review the menu commands in the drop-down menu.
13. Click the Host and Clusters icon.
14. Right-click the Lab Servers folder and review the menu commands in the drop-down menu.
Task 7: Navigate vSphere Client
In VMware vSphere® ClientTM, you navigate through the objects in the navigation tree and view
the configuration settings to become familiar with the UI layout.
1. In the Navigator pane, click the arrow next to each object to expand the view completely.
2. In the Navigator pane, select sa-esxi-01.vclass.local.
3. In the right pane, review the Summary tab and record the following information.
a. Hypervisor
b. Logical Processors
c. NICs
4. On the Summary tab, expand the Hardware and Configuration panes to review the information.
5. In the Navigator pane, select sa-vcsa-01.vclass.local to return to the top of the navigation tree.
6. In the Search text box on the top, enter datastore.
7. When the datastores names appear under the search box, click Class-Datastore.
8. On the Summary tab, review the datastore details in the Details pane.
9. In vSphere Client, Click the Menu icon and select Home.
10. Logout of vSphere Client and close the Firefox Web browser.
11. In the next lab, you use vSphere Web Client to perform the tasks.
12. Inform your instructor that you have completed this lab. If prompted, continue to the next lab.
